\n--- 第2页 ---\nPART ONE
ORIGINAL WORKS\n--- 第4页 ---\nPROSE
1
Self-enquiry
S
elf-enquiry is the first work the Maharshi ever wrote. It
was written about 1901, that is, when he was a young
man of about twenty-two. He was already a Jnani (Sage) in
perfect realization of the Self, in the resplendent bliss of Divine
Knowledge. At that time he was living in Virupaksha Cave on
the hill of Arunachala. A number of disciples had already
gathered round him. Although he had not actually taken a
vow of silence, he seldom spoke, and so wrote his replies to
certain questions put to him by Gambhiram Seshayya, one of
the earliest devotees. The latter copied them in his diary. After
his death this diary was obtained from his brother. The
questions and answers were edited by Natanananda and
published with Bhagavan’s approval under the name of
Vichara Sangraham, or Self-Enquiry. Subsequently they were
changed into the form of an essay. The original form has been
adopted in the present work.
There is no youthfulness or immaturity in the work. The
Master wrote with the authority of full spiritual knowledge,
just as in his later years. Like all his expositions, verbal as
well as written, this is concerned with practical questions of
the path to realization of the Self, never with barren theory.
However, it does differ from later expositions in one important\n--- 第5页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 4
respect: that is, that it describes not only the path of Self-
enquiry but others also; meditation on one’s identity with the
Self and a yogic path based on breath-control. He himself
prescribed only Self-enquiry or submission to the Guru. He
would say: “There are two ways: ask yourself ‘Who am I?’ or
submit.”
Why did he include the mention of less direct and more
elaborate methods in this first exposition? The obvious
contingent reason is that the disciple for whom it was written
had been reading books about these various methods and asked
questions about them. Perhaps also, in a wider sense, it is
appropriate that there should first be a general exposition of
various methods before the lifelong instruction in that which
he prescribed. Certainly the other methods, although
described, are scarcely recommended.
The breath control that is described is, of course, not mere
physical exercise. It is the spiritual significance of the exercise
that makes it an elaborate science. ‘Science’ is indeed the
right word for it, for it is a traditional Indian science of self-
purification. This makes it abstruse for the Western reader
who has no previous grounding in it, especially as, like all
sciences, it has its technical vocabulary which does not permit
adequate translation without lengthy notes. One has to
remember that in writing this exposition the Maharshi knew
that he could count on a technical knowledge of the science
in question in the person for whom he wrote. The consolation
for Western readers is to remember that he neither
recommended nor prescribed this path and in his later works
scarcely mentioned it. It is not necessary for them to learn
its technicalities.\n--- 第6页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 5
Invocation
Is there any way of adoring the Supreme which is all, except
by abiding firmly as That!
1
Disciple: Master! what is the means to gain the state of
eternal bliss, ever devoid of misery?
Master: Apart from the statement in the Vedas that wherever
there is a body there is misery, this is also the direct experience
of all people; therefore, one should enquire into one’s true
nature which is ever bodiless, and one should remain as such.
This is the means to gaining that state.
2
D: What is meant by saying that one should enquire into
one’s true nature and understand it?
M: Experiences such as, ‘I went; I came; I was; I did’ come
naturally to everyone. From these experiences, does it not
appear that the consciousness ‘I’ is the subject of those various
acts? Enquiry into the true nature of that consciousness, and
remaining as oneself is the way to understand, through enquiry,
one’s true nature.
3
D: How is one to enquire ‘Who am I?’
M: Actions such as ‘going’ and ‘coming’ belong only to
the body. And so, when one says, ‘I went, I came’, it amounts
to saying that the body is ‘I’. But, can the body be said to be
the consciousness ‘I’, since the body was not before it was
born, is made up of the five elements, is nonexistent in the
state of deep sleep, and becomes a corpse when dead? Can
this body which is inert like a log of wood be said to shine as\n--- 第7页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 6
‘I-I’? Therefore, the ‘I-consciousness’ which at first arises in
respect of the body is referred to variously as self-conceit
(tarbodham), egoity (ahankara), nescience (avidya), maya,
impurity (mala), and individual soul (jiva). Can we remain
without enquiring into this? Is it not for our redemption
through enquiry that all the scriptures declare that the
destruction of ‘self-conceit’ is release (mukti)? Therefore,
making the corpse-body remain as a corpse, and not even
uttering the word ‘I’, one should enquire keenly thus: “Now,
what is it that rises as ‘I’?” Then, there would shine in the
Heart a kind of wordless illumination of the form ‘I-I’. That
is, there would shine of its own accord the pure consciousness
which is unlimited and one, the limited and the many thoughts
having disappeared. If one remains quiescent without
abandoning that (experience), the egoity, the individual sense,
of the form ‘I am the body’ will be totally destroyed, and at
the end the final thought, viz., the ‘I-form’ also will be
quenched like the fire that burns camphor.1 The great sages
and scriptures declare that this alone is release.
4
D: When one enquires into the root of ‘self-conceit’ which
is of the form ‘I’, all sorts of different thoughts without number
seem to rise; and not any separate ‘I’ thought.
M: Whether the nominative case, which is the first case,
appears or not, the sentences in which the other cases appear
have as their basis the first case; similarly, all the thoughts
that appear in the Heart have as their basis the egoity which is
the first mental mode ‘I’, the cognition of the form ‘I am the
body’; thus, it is the rise of egoity that is the cause and source
of the rise of all other thoughts; therefore, if the self-conceit
1 That is, without leaving any sediment.\n--- 第8页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 7
of the form of egoity which is the root of the illusory tree of
samsara (bondage consisting of transmigration) is destroyed,
all other thoughts will perish completely like an uprooted tree.
Whatever thoughts arise as obstacles to one’s sadhana
(spiritual discipline), the mind should not be allowed to go in
their direction, but should be made to rest in one’s Self which
is the Atman; one should remain as witness to whatever
happens, adopting the attitude ‘Let whatever strange things
happen, happen; let us see!’ This should be one’s practice. In
other words, one should not identify oneself with appearances;
one should never relinquish one’s Self. This is the proper
means for destruction of the mind (manonasa) which is of
the nature of seeing the body as Self, and which is the cause
of all the aforesaid obstacles. This method which easily
destroys egoity deserves to be called devotion (bhakti),
meditation (dhyana), concentration (yoga), and knowledge
(jnana). Because God remains of the nature of the Self,
shining as ‘I’ in the Heart, because the scriptures declare
that thought itself is bondage, the best discipline is to stay
quiescent without ever forgetting Him (God, the Self), after
resolving in Him the mind which is of the form of the ‘I-
thought’, no matter by what means. This is the conclusive
teaching of the scriptures.
5
D: Is enquiry the only means for removal of the false belief
of selfhood in the gross body, or is it also the means for removal
of the false belief of selfhood in the subtle and causal bodies?
M: It is on the gross body that the other bodies subsist. In
the false belief of the form ‘I am the body’ are included all
the three bodies consisting of the five sheaths. And destruction
of the false belief of selfhood in the gross body is itself the
destruction of the false belief of selfhood in the other bodies.\n--- 第9页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 8
So enquiry is the means to removal of the false belief of
selfhood in all the three bodies.
6
D: While there are different modifications of the internal
organ, viz., manas (reflection), buddhi (intellect), chitta
(memory) and ahankara (egoity), how can it be said that the
destruction of the mind alone is release?
M: In the books explaining the nature of the mind, it is
thus stated: “The mind is formed by the concretion of the
subtle portion of the food we eat; it grows with the passions
such as attachment and aversion, desire and anger; being the
aggregate of mind, intellect, memory and egoity, it receives
the collective singular name ‘mind’; the characteristics that it
bears are thinking, determining, etc.; since it is an object of
consciousness (the self), it is what is seen, inert; even though
inert, it appears as if conscious because of association with
consciousness (like a red-hot iron ball); it is limited, non-
eternal, partite, and changing like lac, gold, wax, etc.; it is of
the nature of all elements (of phenomenal existence); its locus
is the Heart-lotus, even as the loci of the sense of sight, etc.,
are the eyes, etc.; it is the adjunct of the individual soul;
thinking of an object, it transforms itself into a mode, and
along with the knowledge that is in the brain, it flows through
the five sense-channels, gets joined to objects by the brain
(that is associated with knowledge), and thus knows and
experiences objects and gains satisfaction. That substance is
the mind.” Even as one and the same person is called by
different names according to the different functions he
performs, so also one and the same mind is called by the
different names: mind, intellect, memory, and egoity, on
account of the difference in the modes — and not because of\n--- 第10页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 9
any real difference. The mind itself is of the form of all, i.e.,
of soul, God and world; when it becomes of the form of the
Self through knowledge there is release, which is of the nature
of Brahman: this is the teaching.
7
D: If these four — mind, intellect, memory and egoity —
are one and the same why are separate locations mentioned
for them?
M: It is true that the throat is stated to be the location of the
mind, the face or the heart of the intellect, the navel of the
memory, and the Heart or sarvanga of the egoity; though
differently stated thus yet, for the aggregate of these, that is
the mind or internal organ, the location is the Heart alone.
This is conclusively declared in the scriptures.
8
D: Why is it said that only the mind which is the internal
organ, shines as the form of all, that is of soul, God and world?
M: As instruments for knowing the objects the sense organs
are outside, and so they are called outer senses; and the mind
is called the inner sense because it is inside. But the distinction
between inner and outer is only with reference to the body; in
truth, there is neither inner nor outer. The mind’s nature is to
remain pure like ether. What is referred to as the Heart or the
mind is the collocation of the elements (of phenomenal
existence) that appear as inner and outer. So there is no doubt
that all phenomena consisting of names and forms are of the
nature of mind alone. All that appear outside are in reality
inside and not outside; it is in order to teach this that in the
Vedas also all have been described as of the nature of the
Heart. What is called the Heart is no other than Brahman.\n--- 第11页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 10
9
D: How can it be said that the Heart is no other than
Brahman?
M: Although the self enjoys its experiences in the states of
waking, dream, and deep sleep, residing respectively in the
eyes, throat and Heart, in reality, however, it never leaves its
principal seat, the Heart. In the Heart-lotus which is of the
nature of all, in other words in the mind-ether, the light of
that Self in the form ‘I’ shines. As it shines thus in everybody,
this very Self is referred to as the witness (sakshi) and the
transcendent (turiya, literally the fourth). The ‘I-less’ Supreme
Brahman which shines in all bodies as interior to the light in
the form ‘I’ is the Self-ether (or knowledge-ether): that alone
is the Absolute Reality. This is the super-transcendent
(turiyatita). Therefore, it is stated that what is called the Heart
is no other than Brahman. Moreover, for the reason that
Brahman shines in the hearts of all souls as the Self, the name
‘Heart’ is given to Brahman.2 The meaning of the word
hridayam, when split thus ‘hrit-ayam’, is in fact Brahman.
The adequate evidence for the fact that Brahman, which shines
as the Self, resides in the hearts of all is that all people indicate
themselves by pointing to the chest when saying ‘I’.
10
D: If the entire universe is of the form of mind, then does it
not follow that the universe is an illusion? If that be the case,
why is the creation of the universe mentioned in the Vedas?
M: There is no doubt whatsoever that the universe is the
merest illusion. The principal purport of the Vedas is to make
known the true Brahman, after showing the apparent universe
2 In the Hearts of all individual souls, that which shines is Brahman and hence
is called the Heart — Brahma Gita.\n--- 第12页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 11
to be false. It is for this purpose that the Vedas admit the
creation of the world and not for any other reason. Moreover,
for the less qualified persons creation is taught, that is the
phased evolution of prakriti (primal nature), mahat tattva (the
great intellect), tanmatras (the subtle essences), bhutas (the
gross elements), the world, the body, etc., from Brahman;
while for the more qualified simultaneous creation is taught,
that is, that this world arose like a dream on account of one’s
own thoughts induced by the defect of not knowing oneself
as the Self. Thus, from the fact that the creation of the world
has been described in different ways it is clear that the purport
of the Vedas rests only in teaching the true nature of Brahman
after showing somehow or other the illusory nature of the
universe. That the world is illusory, everyone can directly know
in the state of Realization which is in the form of experience
of one’s bliss-nature.
11
D: Is Self-experience possible for the mind, whose nature
is constant change?
M: Since sattva guna (the constituent of prakriti which
makes for purity, intelligence, etc.) is the nature of mind, and
since the mind is pure and undefiled like ether, what is called
mind is, in truth, of the nature of knowledge. When it stays in
that natural (i.e. pure) state, it has not even the name ‘mind’.
It is only the erroneous knowledge which mistakes one for
another that is called mind. What was (originally) the pure
sattva mind, of the nature of pure knowledge, forgets its
knowledge-nature on account of nescience, gets transformed
into the world under the influence of tamo guna (i.e. the
constituent of prakriti which makes for dullness, inertness,
etc.), being under the influence of rajo guna (i.e. the
constituent of prakriti which makes for activity, passions, etc.),\n--- 第13页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 12
imagines ‘I am the body, etc.; the world is real’, it acquires
the consequent merit and demerit through attachment,
aversion, etc., and, through the residual impressions (vasanas)
thereof, attains birth and death. But the mind, which has got
rid of its defilement (sin) through action without attachment
performed in many past lives, listens to the teaching of
scripture from a true guru, reflects on its meaning, and
meditates in order to gain the natural state of the mental mode
of the form of the Self, i.e., of the form ‘I am Brahman’ which
is the result of the continued contemplation of Brahman. Thus
will be removed the mind’s transformation into the world in
the aspect of tamo guna, and its roving therein the aspect of
rajo guna. When this removal takes place the mind becomes
subtle and unmoving. It is only by the mind that is impure
and is under the influence of rajas and tamas that Reality
(i.e., the Self) which is very subtle and unchanging cannot be
experienced; just as a piece of fine silk cloth cannot be stitched
with a heavy crowbar, or as the details of subtle objects cannot
be distinguished by the light of a lamp flame that flickers in
the wind. But in the pure mind that has been rendered subtle
and unmoving by the meditation described above, the Self-
bliss (i.e., Brahman) will become manifest. As without mind
there cannot be experience, it is possible for the purified mind
endowed with the extremely subtle mode (vritti) to experience
the Self-bliss, by remaining in that form (i.e. in the form of
Brahman). Then, that one’s Self is of the nature of Brahman
will be clearly experienced.
12
D: Is the aforesaid Self-experience possible, even in the
state of empirical existence, for the mind which has to perform
functions in accordance with its prarabdha (the past karma
which has begun to fructify)?\n--- 第14页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 13
M: A brahmin may play various parts in a drama; yet the
thought that he is a brahmin does not leave his mind. Similarly,
when one is engaged in various empirical acts there should
be the firm conviction ‘I am the Self’, without allowing the
false idea ‘I am the body, etc.’ to rise. If the mind should stray
away from its state, then immediately one should enquire,
‘Oh! Oh! We are not the body, etc. Who are we?’ and thus
one should reinstate the mind in that (pure) state. The enquiry
‘Who am I?’ is the principal means to the removal of all misery
and the attainment of the supreme bliss. When in this manner
the mind becomes quiescent in its own state, Self-experience
arises of its own accord, without any hindrance. Thereafter
sensory pleasures and pains will not affect the mind. All
(phenomena) will appear then, without attachment, like a
dream. Never forgetting one’s plenary Self-experience is real
bhakti (devotion), yoga (mind control), jnana (knowledge)
and all other austerities. Thus say the sages.
13
D: When there is activity in regard to works, we are neither
the agents of those works nor their enjoyers. The activity is of
the three instruments (i.e., the mind, speech, and body). Could
we remain (unattached) thinking thus?
M: After the mind has been made to stay in the Self which
is its deity, and has been rendered indifferent to empirical
matters because it does not stray away from the Self, how can
the mind think as mentioned above? Do not such thoughts
constitute bondage? When such thoughts arise due to residual
impressions (vasanas), one should restrain the mind from
flowing that way, endeavour to retain it in the Self-state, and
make it turn indifferent to empirical matters. One should not
give room in the mind for such thoughts as: ‘Is this good? Or,
is that good? Can this be done? Or, can that be done?’ One\n--- 第15页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 14
should be vigilant even before such thoughts arise and make
the mind stay in its native state. If any little room is given,
such a (disturbed) mind will do harm to us while posing as
our friend; like the foe appearing to be a friend, it will topple
us down. Is it not because one forgets one’s Self that such
thoughts arise and cause more and more evil? While it is true
that to think through discrimination, ‘I do not do anything;
all actions are performed by the instruments’, is a means to
prevent the mind from flowing along thought vasanas, does
it not also follow that only if the mind flows along thought
vasanas that it must be restrained through discrimination as
stated before? Can the mind that remains in the Self-state
think as ‘I’ and as ‘I behave empirically thus and thus’? In all
manner of ways possible one should endeavour gradually not
to forget one’s (true) Self that is God. If that is accomplished,
all will be accomplished. The mind should not be directed to
any other matter. Even though one may perform, like a mad
person, the actions that are the result of prarabdha karma,
one should retain the mind in the Self-state without letting
the thought ‘I do’ arise. Have not countless bhaktas (devotees)
performed their numerous empirical functions with an attitude
of indifference?
14
D: What is the real purport of sannyasa (renunciation)?
M: Sannyasa is only the renunciation of the ‘I-thought’,
and not the rejection of the external objects. He who has
renounced (the ‘I-thought’) thus, remains the same whether
he is alone or in the midst of the extensive samsara (empirical
world). Just as when the mind is concentrated on some object,
it does not observe other things even though they may be
proximate, so also, although the sage may perform any
number of empirical acts, in reality he performs nothing,\n--- 第16页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 15
because he makes the mind rest in the Self without letting
the ‘I-thought’ arise. Even as in a dream one appears to fall
head downwards, while in reality one is unmoving, so also
the ignorant person, i.e., the person for whom the ‘I-thought’
has not ceased, although he remains alone in constant
meditation, is in fact one who performs all empirical actions.3
Thus the wise ones have said.
15
D: The mind, sense-organs, etc., have the ability to
perceive; yet why are they regarded as perceived objects?
M:
Drik (Knower) Drisya (Known object)
1 The seer Pot (i.e., the seen object)
Further,
2 The eye organ Body, Pot, etc.
3 The sense of sight The eye organ
4 The mind The sense of sight
5 The individual soul The mind
6 Consciousness (the Self) The individual soul
As shown in the above scheme, since we, the consciousness,
know all objects, we are said to be drik (knower). The
categories including pot, etc., are the objects seen, since they
are what are known. In the table of ‘knowledge: ignorance
(i.e., knower-known)’ given above, among the knowers and
3 Like those who listen to a story with their attention fixed elsewhere, the mind
whose residual impressions have worn away does not really function even if it
appears to do so. The mind that is not free from residual impressions really
functions even if it does not appear to do so; this is like those who while
remaining stationary imagine in their dreams that they climb up a hill and fall
therefrom — Reality in Forty Verses: Supplement, v. 30\n--- 第17页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 16
objects of knowledge, it is seen that one is knower in relation
to another; yet, since that one is object in relation to another,
none of those categories is, in reality, the knower. Although
we are said to be the ‘knower’ because we know all, and not
the ‘known’ because we are not known by anything else, we
are said to be the ‘knower’ only in relation to the known
objects. In truth, however, what is called the ‘known’ is not
apart from us. And so we are the Reality that transcends those
two (the knower and the known). All the others fall within
the knower-known categories.
16
D: How do egoity, soul, self, and Brahman come to be
identified?
M:
The Example The Exemplified
1 The iron-ball Egoity
2 The heated iron-ball The soul which appears as
a superimposition on the
Self
3 The fire that is in the The light of conscious-
heated iron-ball ness, i.e. the immutable
Brahman, which shines in
the soul in every body
4 The flame of fire which The all pervading Brah-
man which remains as one
remains as one
From the example given above, it will be clear how egoity,
soul, witness, and all-witness come to be identified.
Just as in the wax lump that is with the smith numerous and
varied metal particles lie included and all of them appear to be
one wax lump, so also in deep sleep the gross and subtle bodies\n--- 第18页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 17
of all the individual souls are included in the cosmic maya which
is nescience, of the nature of sheer darkness, and since the souls
are resolved in the Self becoming one with It, they see
everywhere darkness alone. From the darkness of sleep, the
subtle body, viz. egoity, and from that (egoity) the gross body
arise respectively. Even as the egoity arises, it appears
superimposed on the nature of the Self, like the heated iron-
ball. Thus, without the soul (jiva) which is the mind or egoity
that is conjoined with the Consciousness-light, there is no
witness of the soul, viz. the Self, and without the Self there is
no Brahman that is the all-witness. Just as when the iron-ball is
beaten into various shapes by the smith, the fire that is in it
does not change thereby in any manner, even so the soul may
be involved in ever so many experiences and undergo pleasures
and pains, and yet the Self-light that is in it does not change in
the least thereby, and like the ether it is the all-pervasive pure
knowledge that is one, and it shines in the Heart as Brahman.
17
D: How is one to know that in the Heart the Self itself
shines as Brahman?
M: Just as the elemental ether within the flame of a lamp is
known to fill without any difference and without any limit both
the inside and the outside of the flame, so also the knowledge-
ether that is within the Self-light in the Heart fills without any
difference and without any limit both the inside and the outside
of that Self-light. This is what is referred to as Brahman.
18
D: How do the three states of experience, the three bodies,
etc., which are imaginations, appear in the Self-light which is
one, unitary and self-luminous? Even if they should appear,
how is one to know that the Self alone remains ever unmoving?\n--- 第19页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 18
M:
The Example The Exemplified
1 The lamp The Self
2 The door Sleep
3 The doorstep Mahat tattva
4 The inner wall Nescience or the causal
body
5 The mirror The egoity
6 The windows The five cognitive sense
organs
7. The inner chamber Deep sleep in which the
causal body is manifest
8. The middle chamber Dream in which the
subtle body is manifest
9. The outer court Waking state in which
the gross body is manifest
4
1
2 7
3
5
8
6 6 6 6 6
9
The Self which is the lamp (1) shines of its own accord in
the inner chamber, i.e., the causal body (7) that is endowed
with nescience as the inner wall (4) and sleep as the door (2);
when by the vital principle as conditioned by time, karma,\n--- 第20页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 19
etc., the sleep-door is opened, there occurs a reflection of the
Self in the egoity-mirror (5) that is placed next to the doorstep
— mahat tattva (3); the egoity-mirror thus illumines the
middle chamber, i.e., the dream state (8), and, through the
windows which are the five cognitive sense-organs (6), the
outer court, i.e., the waking state (9). When, again, by the
vital principle as conditioned by time, karma, etc., the sleep-
door gets shut, the egoity ceases along with waking and dream,
and the Self alone ever shines. The example just given explains
how the Self is unmoving, how there is difference between
the Self and the egoity and how the three states of experience,
the three bodies, etc., appear.
19
D: Although I have listened to the explanation of the
characteristics of enquiry in such great detail, my mind has
not gained even a little peace. What is the reason for this?
M: The reason is the absence of strength or one-pointedness
of the mind.
20
D: What is the reason for the absence of mental strength?
M: The means that make one qualified for enquiry are
meditation, yoga, etc. One should gain proficiency in these
through graded practice, and thus secure a stream of mental
modes that is natural and helpful. When the mind that has
become ripe in this manner, hears about this enquiry, it will at
once realize its true nature which is the Self, and remain in
perfect peace, without deviating from that state. To a mind
which has not become ripe, immediate realization and peace
are hard to gain through hearing about the enquiry. Yet, if one
practises the means for mind control for some time, peace of
mind can be obtained eventually.\n--- 第21页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 20
21
D: Of the means for mind control, which is the most important?
M: Breath control is the means for mind control.
22
D: How is breath to be controlled?
M: Breath can be controlled either by absolute retention of
breath (kevala kumbhaka) or by regulation of breath
(pranayama).
23
D: What is absolute retention of breath?
M: It is making the vital air stay firmly in the Heart, even
without exhalation and inhalation. This is achieved through
meditation on the vital principle, etc.
24
D: What is regulation of breath?
M: It is making the vital air stay firmly in the Heart through
exhalation, inhalation and retention, according to the
instructions given in the yoga texts.
25
D: How is breath control the means for mind control?
M: There is no doubt that breath control is the means for
mind control, because the mind, like breath, is a part of air,
because the nature of mobility is common to both, because
the place of origin is the same for both, and because when
one of them is controlled the other gets controlled.
26
D: Since breath control leads only to quiescence of the
mind (manolaya) and not to its destruction (manonasa), how\n--- 第22页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 21
can it be said that breath control is the means for enquiry
which aims at the destruction of mind?
M: The scriptures teach the means for gaining Self-realization
in two modes — as the yoga with eight limbs (ashtanga yoga)
and as knowledge with eight limbs (ashtanga jnana). By
regulation of breath (pranayama) or by absolute retention
thereof (kevala kumbhaka), which is one of the limbs of yoga,
the mind gets controlled. Without leaving the mind at that, if
one practises the further discipline such as withdrawal of the
mind from external objects (pratyahara), then at the end, Self-
realization which is the fruit of enquiry will surely be gained.
27
D: What are the limbs of yoga?
M: Yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana,
dhyana, and samadhi. Of these —
(1) Yama: This stands for the cultivation of such principles of
good conduct as nonviolence (ahimsa), truth (satya), non-stealing
(asteya), celibacy (Brahmacharya), and non-possession (aparigraha).
(2) Niyama: This stands for the observance of such rules
of good conduct as purity (saucha), contentment (santosha),
austerity (tapas), study of the sacred texts (svadhyaya), and
devotion to God (Isvarapranidhana).4
(3) Asana: Of the different postures, eighty-four are the
main ones. Of these, again, four, viz., simha, bhadra,
padma, and siddha5 are said to be excellent. Of these too,
4 The Aim of yama and niyama is the attainment of all good paths open to those
eligible for moksha. For more details see works like the Yoga Sutra and
Hathayoga Dipika.
5 Siddhasana: Left heel should be placed over genital organ and over that, the
right heel. Fixing the gaze between the eyebrows, the body should remain
motionless and erect like a stick.\n--- 第23页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 22
it is only siddha, that is the most excellent. Thus the yoga
texts declare.
(4) Pranayama: According to the measures prescribed in
the sacred texts, exhaling the vital air is rechaka, inhaling is
puraka and retaining it in the Heart is kumbhaka. As regards
‘measure’, some texts say that rechaka and puraka should be
equal in measure, and kumbhaka twice that measure, while
other texts say that if rechaka is one measure, puraka should
be of two measures, and kumbhaka of four. By ‘measure’ what
is meant is the time that would be taken for the utterance of
the Gayatri mantra once. Thus pranayama consisting of
rechaka, puraka, and kumbhaka, should be practised daily
according to ability, slowly and gradually. Then, there would
arise for the mind a desire to rest in happiness without moving.
After this, one should practise pratyahara.
(5) Pratyahara: This is regulating the mind by preventing
it from flowing towards the external names and forms. The
mind, which had been till then distracted, now becomes
controlled. The aids in this respect are (1) meditation on the
pranava, (2) fixing the attention betwixt the eyebrows,
(3) looking at the tip of the nose, and (4) reflection on the
nada. The mind that has thus become one-pointed will be fit
to stay in one place. After this, dharana should be practised.
(6) Dharana: This is fixing the mind in a locus which
is fit for meditation. The loci that are eminently fit for
meditation are the Heart and Brahmarandhra (aperture in the
crown of the head). One should think that in the middle of the
eight-petalled lotus6 that is at this place, there shines, like a
6 Although it is true that the lotus in the crown of the head is said to have a
thousand petals, it also may be described as having eight petals because each
of these eight consists of 125 sub-petals.\n--- 第24页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 23
flame, the Deity which is the Self, i.e., Brahman, and fix the
mind therein. After this, one should meditate.
(7) Dhyana: This is meditation, through the ‘I am He’
thought, that one is not different from the nature of the
aforesaid flame. Even, thus, if one makes the enquiry ‘Who
am I?’, then, as the scripture declares, ‘The Brahman which
is everywhere shines in the Heart as the Self that is the witness
of the intellect’, one would realize that it is the Divine Self
that shines in the Heart as ‘I-I’. This mode of reflection is the
best meditation.
(8) Samadhi: As a result of the fruition of the aforesaid
meditation, the mind gets resolved in the object of meditation
without harbouring the ideas ‘I am such and such; I am doing
this and this’. This subtle state in which even the thought ‘I-I’
disappears is samadhi. If one practises this everyday, seeing
to it that sleep does not supervene, God will soon confer on
one the supreme state of quiescence of mind.
28
D: What is the purport of the teaching that in pratyahara
one should meditate on the pranava?
M: The purport of prescribing meditation on the pranava
is this. The pranava is Omkara consisting of three and a half
matras, viz., a, u, m, and ardha matra. Of these, a stands for
the waking state, Visva jiva, and the gross body; u stands for
the dream state, Taijasa jiva, and the subtle body; m stands
for the sleep state, Prajna jiva, and the causal body; the ardha
matra represents the Turiya which is the self or ‘I-nature’;
and what is beyond that is the state of Turiyatita, or pure Bliss.
The fourth state which is the state of ‘I-nature’ was referred
to in the section on meditation (dhyana). This has been
variously described — as of the nature of amatra which\n--- 第25页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 24
includes the three matras, a, u, and m; as maunakshara
(silence-syllable); as ajapa (as muttering without muttering)
and as the advaita mantra which is the essence of all mantras
such as Panchakshara. In order to get at this true significance,
one should meditate on the pranava. This is meditation which
is of the nature of devotion consisting in reflection on the
truth of the Self. The fruition of this process is samadhi which
yields release, which is the state of unsurpassed bliss. The
revered Gurus also have said that release is to be gained only
by devotion which is of the nature of reflection on the truth of
the Self.
29
D: What is the purport of teaching that one should meditate,
through the ‘I am He’ thought, on the truth that one is not
different from the self-luminous Reality that shines like a flame?
M: (a) The purport of teaching that one should cultivate
the idea that one is not different from the self-luminous Reality
is this: Scripture defines meditation in these words, ‘In the
middle of the eight petalled Heart lotus which is of the nature
of all, and which is referred to as Kailasa, Vaikunta, and
Paramapada, there is the Reality which is of the size of the
thumb, which is dazzling like lightning and which shines like
a flame. By meditating on it, a person gains immortality.’ From
this we should know that by such meditation one avoids the
defects of (1) the thought of difference, of the form ‘I am
different, and that is different’, (2) the meditation on what is
limited, (3) the idea that the Real is limited, and (4) that it is
confined to one place.
(b) The purport of teaching that one should meditate with
the ‘I am He’ (sahaham, Soham) thought is this: sah is the
supreme Self, aham is the Self that is manifest as ‘I’. The jiva\n--- 第26页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 25
which is the Sivalinga resides in the Heart-lotus which is its
seat situated in the body which is the city of Brahman; the
mind which is of the nature of egoity, goes outward identifying
itself with the body, etc. Now, the mind should be resolved in
the Heart, i.e., the I-sense that is placed in the body, etc.,
should be got rid of; when one thus enquires ‘Who am I?’,
remaining undisturbed, in that state, the Self-nature becomes
manifest in a subtle manner as ‘I-I’; that Self-nature is all and
yet none, and is manifest as the supreme Self everywhere
without the distinction of inner and outer; that shines like a
flame, as was stated above, signifying the truth ‘I am
Brahman’. If, without meditating on that as being identical
with oneself, one imagines it to be different, ignorance will
not leave. Hence, the identity-meditation is prescribed.
If one meditates for a long time, without disturbance, on
the Self ceaselessly, with the ‘I am He’ thought which is the
technique of reflection on the Self, the darkness of ignorance
which is in the Heart and all the impediments which are but
the effects of ignorance will be removed, and the plenary
wisdom will be gained.7
Thus, realizing the Reality in the Heart-cave which is in
the city (of Brahman), viz. the body, is the same as realizing
the all-perfect God.
In the city with nine gates, which is the body, the wise one
resides at ease.8
The body is the temple; the jiva is God (Siva). If one
worships him with the ‘I am He’ thought, one will gain release.
7 “If meditation in the form ‘I am Siva’ (Sivoham bhavana), which prevents the
thought going outwards, is practised always, samadhi will come about.”
—Vallalar
8 “In the city that has nine false gates, He resides in the form of bliss.”
—Bhagavad Gita\n--- 第27页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 26
The body which consists of the five sheaths is the cave, the
Supreme that resides there is the Lord of the cave. Thus the
scriptures declare.
Since the Self is the reality of all the gods, the meditation
on the Self which is oneself is the greatest of all meditations.
All other meditations are included in this. It is for gaining
this that the other meditations are prescribed. So, if this is
gained, the others are not necessary. Knowing one’s Self is
knowing God. Without knowing one’s Self that meditates,
imagining that there is a deity which is different and meditating
on it, is compared by the great ones to the act of measuring
with one’s foot one’s own shadow, and to the search for a
trivial conch after throwing away a priceless gem that is
already in one’s possession.9
30
D: Even though the Heart and the Brahmarandhra alone
are the loci fit for meditation, could one meditate, if necessary,
on the six mystic centres (adharas)?
M: The six mystic centres, etc., which are said to be loci of
meditation, are but products of imagination. All these are
meant for beginners in yoga. With reference to meditation on
the six centres, the Sivayogins say, ‘God, who is of the nature
of the non-dual, plenary, Consciousness-Self, manifests,
sustains and resolves us all. It is a great sin to spoil that Reality
by superimposing on it various names and forms such as
Ganapati, Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Maheswara and Sadasiva’,
and the Vedantins declare, ‘All those are but imaginations of
9 “We shall meditate on that which, existing in the form of Self, is the atma
tattva, is effulgent, and which residing in all living things always says ‘I’, ‘I’.
To seek for a God outside, leaving the God residing in the cave of the Heart, is
like throwing away a priceless gem and searching for a trivial bead.” —Yoga
Vasishta\n--- 第28页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 27
the mind.’ Therefore, if one knows one’s Self which is of the
nature of consciousness that knows everything, one knows
everything. The great ones have also said: ‘When that One is
known as it is in Itself, all that has not been known becomes
known.’ If we who are endowed with various thoughts meditate
on God that is the Self, we would get rid of the plurality of
thoughts by that one thought; then, even that one thought
would vanish. This is what is meant by saying that knowing
one’s Self is knowing God. This knowledge is release.
31
D: How is one to think of the Self?
M: The Self is self-luminous without darkness and light,
and is the reality which is self-manifest. Therefore, one should
not think of it as this or as that. The very thought of thinking
will end in bondage. The purport of meditation on the Self is
to make the mind take the form of the Self. In the middle of
the Heart-cave the pure Brahman is directly manifest as the
Self in the form of ‘I-I’. Can there be greater ignorance than
to think of it in manifold ways, without knowing it as
aforementioned?
32
D: It was stated that Brahman is manifest as the Self in the
form of ‘I-I’, in the Heart. To facilitate an understanding of
this statement, can it be still further explained?
M: Is it not within the experience of all that during deep
sleep, swoon, etc., there is no knowledge whatsoever, i.e.,
neither Self-knowledge nor other-knowledge? Afterwards,
when there is experience of the form ‘I have woken up from
sleep’ or ‘I have recovered from swoon’ — is that not a mode
of specific knowledge that has arisen from the aforementioned
distinctionless state? This specific knowledge is called vijnana.\n--- 第29页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 28
This vijnana becomes manifest only as pertaining to either
the Self or the not-self, and not by itself. When it pertains to
the Self, it is called true knowledge, knowledge in the form
of that mental mode whose object is the Self, or knowledge
which has for its content the unitary (Self); and when it relates
to the not-self, it is called ignorance. The state of this vijnana,
when it pertains to the Self and is manifest as of the form of
the Self, is said to be the ‘I-manifestation’. This manifestation
cannot take place as apart from the Real (i.e., the Self). It is
this manifestation that serves as the mark for the direct
experience of the Real. Yet, this by itself cannot constitute the
state of being the Real. That, depending on which this
manifestation takes place is the basic Reality which is also
called prajnana. The Vedantic text ‘prajnanam brahma’
teaches the same truth.
Know this as the purport of the scripture also. The Self
which is self-luminous and the witness of everything manifests
itself as residing in the vijnanakosa (sheath of the intellect).
By the mental mode which is impartite, seize this Self as your
goal and enjoy it as the Self.
33
D: What is that which is called the inner worship or worship
of the attributeless?
M: In texts such as the Ribhu Gita, the worship of the
attributeless has been elaborately explained (as a separate
discipline). Yet, all disciplines such as sacrifice, charity,
austerity, observance of vows, japa, yoga and puja, are, in
effect, modes of meditation of the form ‘I am Brahman’. So,
in all the modes of disciplines, one should see to it that one
does not stray away from the thought ‘I am Brahman’. This
is the purport of the worship of the attributeless.\n--- 第30页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 29
34
D: What are the eight limbs of knowledge (jnana ashtanga)?
M: The eight limbs are those which have been already
mentioned, viz., yama, niyama etc., but differently defined:
(1) Yama: This is controlling the aggregate of sense-organs,
realizing the defects that are present in the world consisting
of the body, etc.
(2) Niyama: This is maintaining a stream of mental modes
that relate to the Self and rejecting the contrary modes. In
other words, it means love that arises uninterruptedly for the
Supreme Self.
(3) Asana: That with the help of which constant meditation
on Brahman is made possible with ease is asana.
(4) Pranayama: Rechaka (exhalation) is removing the two
unreal aspects of name and form from the objects constituting
the world, the body etc., puraka (inhalation) is grasping the
three real aspects, existence, consciousness and bliss, which
are constant in those objects, and kumbhaka is retaining those
aspects thus grasped.
(5) Pratyahara: This is preventing name and form which
have been removed from re-entering the mind.
(6) Dharana: This is making the mind stay in the Heart,
without straying outward, and realizing that one is the Self
itself which is Existence-Consciousness-Bliss.
(7) Dhyana: This is meditation of the form ‘I am only pure
consciousness’. That is, after leaving aside the body which
consists of five sheaths, one enquires ‘Who am I?’, and as a
result of that, one stays as ‘I’ which shines as the Self.\n--- 第31页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 30
(8) Samadhi: When the ‘I-manifestation’ also ceases, there
is (subtle) direct experience. This is samadhi.
For pranayama, etc., detailed here, the disciplines such as
asana, etc., mentioned in connection with yoga are not necessary.
The limbs of knowledge may be practised at all places and at all
times. Of yoga and knowledge, one may follow whichever is
pleasing to one, or both, according to circumstances. The great
teachers say that forgetfulness is the root of all evil, and is death
for those who seek release,10 so one should rest the mind in one’s
Self and should never forget the Self: this is the aim. If the mind
is controlled, all else can be controlled. The distinction between
yoga with eight limbs and knowledge with eight limbs has been
set forth elaborately in the sacred texts; so only the substance of
this teaching has been given here.
35
D: Is it possible to practise at the same time the pranayama
belonging to yoga and the pranayama pertaining to
knowledge?
M: So long as the mind has not been made to rest in the
Heart, either through absolute retention (kevala kumbhaka)
or through enquiry, rechaka, puraka etc., are needed. Hence,
the pranayama of yoga is to be practised during training, and
the other pranayama may be practised always. Thus, both
may be practised. It is enough if the yogic pranayama is
practised till skill is gained in absolute retention.
36
D: Why should the path to release be differently taught?
Will it not create confusion in the minds of aspirants?
10 “Death or Kala is the giving up on this earth of the contemplation of the Self
which should never be given up even the least bit.” — Vivekachudamani\n--- 第32页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 31
M: Several paths are taught in the Vedas to suit the different
grades of qualified aspirants. Yet, since release is but the
destruction of the mind, all efforts have for their aim the control
of mind. Although the modes of meditation may appear to be
different from one another, in the end all of them become
one. There is no need to doubt this. One may adopt that path
which suits the maturity of one’s mind.
The control of prana which is yoga, and the control of
mind which is jnana11 — these are the two principal means
for the destruction of the mind. To some, the former may
appear easy, and to others the latter. Yet, jnana is like subduing
a turbulent bull by coaxing it with green grass, while yoga is
like controlling it through the use of force. Thus the wise
ones say that of the three grades of qualified aspirants, the
highest reach the goal by making the mind firm in the Self
through determining the nature of the real by Vedantic enquiry
and by looking upon one’s self and all things as of the nature
of the Real; the mediocre by making the mind stay in the
Heart through kevala kumbhaka and meditating for a long
time on the Real; and the lowest grade, by gaining that state
in a gradual manner through breath-control, etc.
The mind should be made to rest in the Heart till the
destruction of the ‘I-thought’ which is of the form of
ignorance, residing in the Heart. This itself is jnana; this alone
is dhyana also. The rest are a mere digression of words,
digression of the texts. Thus the scriptures proclaim.
Therefore, if one gains the skill of retaining the mind in one’s
Self through some means or other, one need not worry about
other matters.
11 Seeing everything as Real according to the scripture: I am Brahman — one
only without a second.\n--- 第33页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 32
The great teachers also have taught that the devotee is
greater than the yogil2 and that the means to release is devotion,
which is of the nature of reflection on one’s own Self.l3
Thus, it is the path of realizing Brahman that is variously
called Dahara vidya, Brahma Vidya, Atma vidya, etc. What
more can be said than this? One should understand the rest by
inference.
The scriptures teach in different modes. After analysing
all those modes the great ones declare this to be the shortest
and the best means.
37
D: By practising the disciplines taught above, one may get
rid of the obstacles that are in the mind, viz., ignorance, doubt,
error, etc., and thereby attain quiescence of mind. Yet, there is
one last doubt. After the mind has been resolved in the Heart,
there is only consciousness shining as the plenary reality. When
thus the mind has assumed the form of the Self, who is there
to enquire? Such enquiry would result in self-worship. It would
be like the story of the shepherd searching for the sheep that
was all the time on his shoulders!
M: The jiva itself is Siva; Siva Himself is the jiva. It is true
that the jiva is no other than Siva. When the grain is hidden
inside the husk, it is called paddy; when it is dehusked, it is
called rice. Similarly, so long as one is bound by karma one
remains a jiva; when the bond of ignorance is broken, one
shines as Siva, the Deity. Thus declares a scriptural text.
Accordingly, the jiva which is mind, is in reality the pure
12 “Of all yogins, only he who rests his unwavering mind and love in me is dear
to me.” — Bhagavad Gita
13 “Of the means to release only bhakti (devotion) may be said to be the highest.
For, bhakti is constant reflection on one’s own Self.” — Vivekachudamani\n--- 第34页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 33
Self; but, forgetting this truth, it imagines itself to be an
individual soul and gets bound in the shape of mind. So its
search for the Self, which is itself, is like the search for the
sheep by the shepherd. But still, the jiva which has forgotten
itself will not become the Self through mere mediate
knowledge. By the impediment caused by the residual
impressions gathered in previous births, the jiva forgets again
and again its identity with the Self and gets deceived,
identifying itself with the body, etc. Will a person become a
high officer by merely looking at him? Is it not by steady
effort in that direction that he could become a highly placed
officer? Similarly, the jiva, which is in bondage through mental
identification with the body, etc., should put forth effort in
the form of reflection on the Self in a gradual and sustained
manner; and when thus the mind gets destroyed, the jiva would
become the Self.l4
The reflection on the Self which is thus practised constantly
will destroy the mind, and thereafter will destroy itself like
the stick that is used to kindle the cinders burning a corpse. It
is this state that is called release.
38
D: If the jiva is by nature identical with the Self, what is it
that prevents the jiva from realizing its true nature?
M: It is forgetfulness of the jiva’s true nature; this is known
as the power of veiling.
39
D: If it is true that the jiva has forgotten itself, how does
the ‘I-experience’ arise for all?
14 Though the obstacles which cause the bondage of birth may be many,
the root-cause for all such changes is ahankara. This root-cause must
be destroyed for ever — Vivekachudamani.\n--- 第35页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 34
M: The veil does not completely hide the jiva;l5 it only
hides the Self-nature of ‘I’ and projects the ‘I am the body’
notion; but it does not hide the Self’s existence which is ‘I’,
and which is real and eternal.
40
D: What are the characteristics of the jivanmukta (the
liberated in life) and the videhamukta (the liberated at death)?
M: ‘I am not the body. I am Brahman which is manifest as
the Self. In me who am the plenary Reality,l6 the world
consisting of bodies, etc., is a mere appearance, like the blue
of the sky’. He who has realized the truth thus is a jivanmukta.
Yet, so long as his mind has not been resolved, there may
arise some misery for him because of relation to objects on
account of prarabdha (karma which has begun to fructify
and whose result is the present body), and as the movement
of mind has not ceased there will not be also the experience
of bliss. The experience of Self is possible only for the mind
that has become subtle and unmoving as a result of prolonged
meditation. He who is thus endowed with a mind that has
become subtle, and who has the experience of the Self is called
a jivanmukta. It is the state of jivanmukti that is referred to as
the attributeless Brahman and as the Turiya. When even the
subtle mind gets resolved, and experience of self ceases, and
when one is immersed in the ocean of bliss and has become
one with it without any differentiated existence, one is called
a videhamukta. It is the state of videhamukti that is referred to
as the transcendent attributeless Brahman and as the
transcendent Turiya. This is the final goal. Because of the
grades in misery and happiness, the released ones, the
15 Ignorance cannot hide the basic ‘I’, but it hides the specific truth that the jiva
is the Supreme (Self) — Kaivalya Navaneetha.
16 If there is prolonged meditation that the worlds are an appearance in me, who
am the plenary Reality, where can ignorance stand? — Kaivalya Navaneetha.\n--- 第36页 ---\nSelf-enquiry 35
jivanmuktas and videhamuktas, may be spoken of as belonging
to four categories — Brahmavid, Brahmavara, Brahmavariya
and Brahmavarishtha. But these distinctions are from the
standpoint of the others who look at them; in reality, however,
there are no distinctions in release gained through jnana.
OBEISANCE
MAY THE FEET OF RAMANA, THE MASTER,
WHO IS THE GREAT SIVA HIMSELF
AND IS ALSO IN HUMAN FORM,
FLOURISH FOR EVER!
(Translated by Prof. T. M. P. Mahadevan)\n--- 第37页 ---\n36
2
Who am I?
W
ho am I? was written at the same period as Self-
Enquiry. It began as answers to certain questions asked
by Sivaprakasam Pillai, one of the early devotees. The latter
arranged and elaborated the questions and answers and
submitted them for Bhagavan’s approval. They were then
published in the form of questions and answers but later
changed into the form of a connected exposition. The original
work has been adopted in the present edition.
As all living beings desire to be happy always, without
misery, as in the case of everyone there is observed supreme
love for one’s self, and as happiness alone is the cause for
love, in order to gain that happiness which is one’s nature and
which is experienced in the state of deep sleep where there is
no mind, one should know one’s Self. For that, the path of
knowledge, the enquiry of the form ‘Who am I?’, is the
principal means.
1. Who am I?
The gross body which is composed of the seven humours
(dhatus), I am not; the five cognitive sense organs, viz., the
senses of hearing, touch, sight, taste, and smell, which
apprehend their respective objects, viz., sound, touch, colour,
taste, and odour, I am not; the five conative sense organs,\n--- 第38页 ---\nWho am I? 37
viz., the organs of speech, locomotion, grasping, excretion
and procreation, which have as their respective functions,
speaking, moving, grasping, excreting and enjoying, I am not;
the five vital airs, prana, etc., which perform respectively the
five functions of inbreathing, etc., I am not; even the mind
which thinks, I am not; the nescience too, which is endowed
only with the residual impressions of objects, and in which
there are no objects and no functionings, I am not.
2. If I am none of these, then Who am I?
After negating all of the above mentioned as ‘not this’,
‘not this’, that Awareness which alone remains — that I am.
3. What is the nature of Awareness?
The nature of Awareness is Existence-Consciousness-Bliss.
4. When will the realization of the Self be gained?
When the world which is what-is-seen has been removed,
there will be realization of the Self which is the seer.
5. Will there not be realization of the Self even while the
world is there (taken as real)?
There will not be.
6. Why?
The seer and the object seen are like the rope and the
snake. Just as the knowledge of the rope which is the substrate
will not arise unless the false knowledge of the illusory
serpent goes, so the realization of the Self which is the
substrate will not be gained unless the belief that the world
is real is removed.
7. When will the world which is the object seen be removed?
When the mind, which is the cause of all cognition and of
all actions, becomes quiescent, the world will disappear.\n--- 第39页 ---\nWho am I? 38
8. What is the nature of the mind?
What is called ‘mind’ is a wondrous power residing in the
Self. It causes all thoughts to arise. Apart from thoughts, there
is no such thing as mind. Therefore, thought is the nature of
mind. Apart from thoughts, there is no independent entity
called the world. In deep sleep there are no thoughts, and
there is no world. In the states of waking and dream, there are
thoughts, and there is a world also. Just as the spider emits
the thread (of the web) out of itself and again withdraws it
into itself, likewise the mind projects the world out of itself
and again resolves it into itself. When the mind comes out of
the Self, the world appears. Therefore, when the world appears
(to be real), the Self does not appear; and when the Self appears
(shines) the world does not appear. When one persistently
inquires into the nature of the mind, the mind will end leaving
the Self (as the residue). What is referred to as the Self is the
Atman. The mind always exists only in dependence on
something gross; it cannot stay alone. It is the mind that is
called the subtle body or the soul (jiva).
9. What is the path of enquiry for understanding the nature
of the mind?
That which rises as ‘I’ in this body is the mind. If one
inquires as to where in the body the thought ‘I’ rises first, one
would discover that it rises in the Heart. That is the place of
the mind’s origin. Even if one thinks constantly ‘I’ ‘I’, one
will be led to that place. Of all the thoughts that arise in the
mind, the ‘I-thought’ is the first. It is only after the rise of this
that the other thoughts arise. It is after the appearance of the
first personal pronoun that the second and third personal
pronouns appear; without the first personal pronoun there will
not be the second and third.\n--- 第40页 ---\nWho am I? 39
10. How will the mind become quiescent?
By the enquiry ‘Who am I?’. The thought ‘Who am I?’
will destroy all other thoughts, and like the stick used for
stirring the burning pyre, it will itself in the end get destroyed.
Then, there will arise Self-realization.
11. What is the means for constantly holding on to the thought
‘Who am I?’
When other thoughts arise, one should not pursue them,
but should inquire ‘To whom do they arise?’ It does not
matter how many thoughts arise. As each thought arises,
one should inquire with diligence, ‘To whom has this thought
arisen?’. The answer that would emerge would be ‘To me’.
Thereupon if one inquires ‘Who am I?’, the mind will go
back to its source; and the thought that arose will become
quiescent. With repeated practice in this manner, the mind
will develop the skill to stay in its source. When the mind
that is subtle goes out through the brain and the sense-organs,
the gross names and forms appear; when it stays in the Heart,
the names and forms disappear. Not letting the mind go out,
but retaining it in the Heart is what is called ‘inwardness’
(antarmukha). Letting the mind go out of the Heart is known
as ‘externalisation’ (bahirmukha). Thus, when the mind stays
in the Heart, the ‘I’ which is the source of all thoughts will
go, and the Self which ever exists will shine. Whatever one
does, one should do without the egoity ‘I’. If one acts in that
way, all will appear as of the nature of Siva (God).
12. Are there no other means for making the mind quiescent?
Other than enquiry, there are no adequate means. If through
other means it is sought to control the mind, the mind will
appear to be controlled, but will again go forth. Through the
control of breath also, the mind will become quiescent; but it\n--- 第41页 ---\nWho am I? 40
will be quiescent only so long as the breath remains controlled,
and when the breath resumes the mind also will again start
moving and will wander as impelled by residual impressions.
The source is the same for both mind and breath. Thought,
indeed, is the nature of the mind. The thought ‘I’ is the first
thought of the mind; and that is egoity. It is from that whence
egoity originates that breath also originates. Therefore, when
the mind becomes quiescent, the breath is controlled, and when
the breath is controlled the mind becomes quiescent. But in
deep sleep, although the mind becomes quiescent, the breath
does not stop. This is because of the will of God, so that the
body may be preserved and other people may not be under
the impression that it is dead. In the state of waking and in
samadhi, when the mind becomes quiescent the breath is
controlled. Breath is the gross form of mind. Till the time of
death, the mind keeps breath in the body; and when the body
dies the mind takes the breath along with it. Therefore,
the exercise of breath control is only an aid for rendering
the mind quiescent (manonigraha); it will not destroy the
mind (manonasa).
Like the practice of breath control, meditation on the forms
of God, repetition of mantras, food restrictions, etc., are but
aids for rendering the mind quiescent.
Through meditation on the forms of God and through
repetition of mantras, the mind becomes one-pointed. The
mind will always be wandering. Just as when a chain is given
to an elephant to hold in its trunk it will go along grasping the
chain and nothing else, so also when the mind is occupied
with a name or form it will grasp that alone. When the mind
expands in the form of countless thoughts, each thought
becomes weak; but as thoughts get resolved the mind becomes
one-pointed and strong; for such a mind Self-enquiry will\n--- 第42页 ---\nWho am I? 41
become easy. Of all the restrictive rules, that relating to the
taking of sattvic food in moderate quantities is the best; by
observing this rule, the sattvic quality of mind will increase,
and that will be helpful to Self-enquiry.
13. The residual impressions (thoughts) of objects appear
unending like the waves of an ocean. When will all of
them get destroyed?
As the meditation on the Self rises higher and higher, the
thoughts will get destroyed.
14. Is it possible for the residual impressions of objects that
come from beginningless time, as it were, to be resolved,
and for one to remain as the pure Self?
Without yielding to the doubt ‘Is it possible, or not?’, one
should persistently hold on to the meditation on the Self. Even
if one be a great sinner, one should not worry and weep ‘O! I
am a sinner, how can I be saved?’ One should completely
renounce the thought ‘I am a sinner’ and concentrate keenly
on meditation on the Self; then, one would surely succeed.
There are not two minds — one good and the other evil; the
mind is only one. It is the residual impressions that are of two
kinds — auspicious and inauspicious. When the mind is under
the influence of auspicious impressions it is called good, and
when it is under the influence of inauspicious impressions it
is regarded as evil.
The mind should not be allowed to wander towards worldly
objects and what concerns other people. However bad other
people may be, one should bear no hatred for them. Both
desire and hatred should be eschewed. All that one gives to
others one gives to one’s self. If this truth is understood who
will not give to others? When one’s self arises all arises; when
one’s self becomes quiescent all becomes quiescent. To the\n--- 第43页 ---\nWho am I? 42
extent we behave with humility, to that extent there will result
good. If the mind is rendered quiescent, one may live
anywhere.
15. How long should enquiry be practised?
As long as there are impressions of objects in the mind, so
long the enquiry ‘Who am I?’ is required. As thoughts arise
they should be destroyed then and there in the very place of
their origin through enquiry. If one resorts to contemplation
of the Self unintermittently, until the Self is gained, that alone
would do. As long as there are enemies within the fortress,
they will continue to sally forth; if they are destroyed as they
emerge, the fortress will fall into our hands.
16. What is the nature of the Self?
What exists in truth is the Self alone. The world, the
individual soul and God are appearances in it. Like silver in
mother-of-pearl, these three appear at the same time and
disappear at the same time.
The Self is that where there is absolutely no ‘I-thought’.
That is called ‘Silence’. The Self itself is the world; the Self
itself is ‘I’; the Self itself is God; all is Siva, the Self.
17. Is not everything the work of God?
Without desire, resolve, or effort, the sun rises; and in its
mere presence, the sunstone emits fire, the lotus blooms, water
evaporates, people perform their various functions and then
rest. Just as in the presence of the magnet the needle moves, it
is by virtue of the mere presence of God that the souls governed
by the three (cosmic) functions or the fivefold divine activity
perform their actions and then rest, in accordance with their
respective karmas. God has no resolve; no karma attaches
itself to Him. That is like worldly actions not affecting the\n--- 第44页 ---\nWho am I? 43
sun, or like the merits and demerits of the other four elements
not affecting all-pervading space.
18. Of the devotees, who is the greatest?
He who gives himself up to the Self that is God is the most
excellent devotee. Giving one’s self up to God means
remaining constantly in the Self without giving room for the
rise of any thoughts other than the thought of the Self.
Whatever burdens are thrown on God, He bears them. Since
the supreme power of God makes all things move, why should
we, without submitting ourselves to it, constantly worry
ourselves with thoughts as to what should be done and how,
and what should not be done and how not? We know that the
train carries all loads, so after getting on it why should we
carry our small luggage on our head to our discomfort, instead
of putting it down in the train and feeling at ease?
19. What is non-attachment?
As thoughts arise, destroying them utterly without any
residue in the very place of their origin is non-attachment.
Just as the pearl-diver ties a stone to his waist, sinks to the
bottom of the sea and there takes the pearls, so each one of us
should be endowed with non-attachment, dive within oneself
and obtain the Self-Pearl.
20. Is it not possible for God and the Guru to effect the release
of a soul?
God and the Guru will only show the way to release; they
will not by themselves take the soul to the state of release.
In truth, God and the Guru are not different. Just as the
prey which has fallen into the jaws of a tiger has no escape,
so those who have come within the ambit of the Guru’s
gracious look will be saved by the Guru and will not get lost;\n--- 第45页 ---\nWho am I? 44
yet, each one should, by his own effort pursue the path shown
by God or Guru and gain release. One can know oneself only
with one’s own eye of knowledge, and not with somebody
else’s. Does he who is Rama require the help of a mirror to
know that he is Rama?
21. Is it necessary for one who longs for release to inquire
into the nature of categories (tattvas)?
Just as one who wants to throw away garbage has no need
to analyse it and see what it is, so one who wants to know the
Self has no need to count the number of categories or inquire
into their characteristics; what he has to do is to reject
altogether the categories that hide the Self. The world should
be considered like a dream.
22. Is there no difference between waking and dream?
Waking is long and a dream short; other than this there is
no difference. Just as waking happenings seem real while
awake, so do those in a dream while dreaming. In dream the
mind takes on another body. In both waking and dream states
thoughts, names and forms occur simultaneously.
23. Is it any use reading books for those who long for release?
All the texts say that in order to gain release one should
render the mind quiescent; therefore their conclusive teaching
is that the mind should be rendered quiescent; once this has
been understood there is no need for endless reading. In order
to quieten the mind one has only to inquire within oneself
what one’s Self is; how could this search be done in books?
One should know one’s Self with one’s own eye of wisdom.
The Self is within the five sheaths; but books are outside them.
Since the Self has to be inquired into by discarding the five
sheaths, it is futile to search for it in books. There will come
a time when one will have to forget all that one has learned.\n--- 第46页 ---\nWho am I? 45
24. What is happiness?
Happiness is the very nature of the Self; happiness and the
Self are not different. There is no happiness in any object of the
world. We imagine through our ignorance that we derive
happiness from objects. When the mind goes out, it experiences
misery. In truth, when its desires are fulfilled, it returns to its
own place and enjoys the happiness that is the Self. Similarly,
in the states of sleep, samadhi and fainting, and when the object
desired is obtained or the object disliked is removed, the mind
becomes inward-turned, and enjoys pure Self-happiness. Thus
the mind moves without rest alternately going out of the Self
and returning to it. Under the tree the shade is pleasant; out in
the open the heat is scorching. A person who has been going
about in the sun feels cool when he reaches the shade. Someone
who keeps on going from the shade into the sun and then back
into the shade is a fool. A wise man stays permanently in the
shade. Similarly, the mind of the one who knows the truth does
not leave Brahman. The mind of the ignorant, on the contrary,
revolves in the world, feeling miserable, and for a little time
returns to Brahman to experience happiness. In fact, what is
called the world is only thought. When the world disappears,
i.e., when there is no thought, the mind experiences happiness;
and when the world appears, it goes through misery.
25. What is wisdom-insight (jnana drishti)?
Remaining quiet is what is called wisdom-insight. To
remain quiet is to resolve the mind in the Self. Telepathy,
knowing past, present and future happenings and clairvoyance
do not constitute wisdom-insight.
26. What is the relation between desirelessness and wisdom?
Desirelessness is wisdom. The two are not different; they
are the same. Desirelessness is refraining from turning the\n--- 第47页 ---\nmind towards any object. Wisdom means the appearance
of no object. In other words, not seeking what is other than
the Self is detachment or desirelessness; not leaving the Self
is wisdom.
27. What is the difference between enquiry and meditation?
Enquiry consists in retaining the mind in the Self.
Meditation consists in thinking that one’s self is Brahman,
Existence-Consciousness-Bliss.
28. What is release?
Inquiring into the nature of one’s self that is in bondage,
and realising one’s true nature is release.\n--- 第48页 ---\n3
Spiritual Instruction
S
ri Natanananda, one of the earliest devotees, noted down
the conversation which took place one day between
Bhagavan and his devotees. These were then arranged and
expanded and shown to Bhagavan who appreciated them. They
were then published under the name of Upadesa Manjari, or
Spiritual Instruction.
Invocation
I seek refuge at the sacred feet of the blessed Ramana, who
performs the entire work of creation, preservation and
destruction, while remaining wholly unattached, and who
makes us aware of what is real and thus protects us, that I
may set down his words fittingly.
Importance of the Work
Worshipping with the instruments (of thought, word and
body) the sacred lotus feet of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi,
the very embodiment of the beginningless infinite supreme
Brahman, the Satchitananda (existence, consciousness, bliss),
I have gathered this bouquet of the flowers of his instructions
(upadesa manjari) for the benefit of those who are foremost
among the seekers of liberation and who are adored by learned
persons, in order that they might adorn themselves with it
and attain salvation.\n--- 第49页 ---\nThis book is an epitome of the immortal words of that great
soul, Sri Ramana Maharshi, whose teachings entirely dispelled
the doubts and wrong notions of this humble person even as
the sun dispels darkness.
The subject of this book is that eternal Brahman, which
shines as the pinnacle and heart of all the Vedas and Agamas.
That incomparable Self-realization (atma siddhi) which is
praised by all the Upanishads and which is the supreme good
to be sought by all noble aspirants (brahmavids) is the theme
of this work.\n--- 第50页 ---\nCHAPTER I
INSTRUCTION
(Upadesa)
1. What are the marks of a real teacher (Sadguru)?
Steady abidance in the Self, looking at all with an equal
eye, unshakeable courage at all times, in all places and
circumstances, etc.
2. What are the marks of an earnest disciple (sadsishya)?
An intense longing for the removal of sorrow and attainment
of joy and an intense aversion for all kinds of mundane pleasure.
3. What are the characteristics of instruction (upadesa)?
The word ‘upadesa’ means, ‘near the place or seat’ (upa -
near, desa - place or seat). The Guru who is the embodiment
of that which is indicated by the terms sat, chit, and ananda
(existence, consciousness and bliss), prevents the disciple who,
on account of his acceptance of the forms of the objects of
the senses, has swerved from his true state and is consequently
distressed and buffeted by joys and sorrows, from continuing
so and establishes him in his own real nature without
differentiation.
Upadesa also means showing a distant object quite near. It
is brought home to the disciple that Brahman which he believes
to be distant and different from himself is near and not different
from himself.
4. If it be true that the Guru is one’s own Self (Atman),
what is the principle underlying the doctrine which says
that, however learned a disciple may be or whatever occult\n--- 第51页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 50
powers he may possess, he cannot attain Self-realization
(atmasiddhi) without the grace of the Guru?
Although in absolute truth the state of the Guru is that of
oneself it is very hard for the Self which has become the
individual soul (jiva) through ignorance to realize its true state
or nature without the grace of the Guru.
All mental concepts are controlled by the mere presence
of the real Guru. If he were to say to one who arrogantly
claims that he has seen the farther shore of the ocean of
learning or one who claims arrogantly that he can perform
deeds which are well-nigh impossible, “Yes, you learnt all
that is to be learnt, but have you learnt (to know) yourself?
And you who are capable of performing deeds which are
almost impossible, have you seen yourself?” Questioned thus,
they will bow their heads (in shame) and remain silent. Thus
it is evident that only by the grace of the Guru and by no other
accomplishment is it possible to know oneself.
5. What are the marks of the Guru’s grace?
It is beyond words or thoughts.
6. If that is so, how is it that it is said that the disciple realizes
his true state by the Guru’s grace?
It is like the elephant which wakes up on seeing a lion in
its dream. Even as the elephant wakes up at the mere sight of
the lion, so too is it certain that the disciple wakes up from
the sleep of ignorance into the wakefulness of true knowledge
through the Guru’s benevolent look of grace.
7. What is the significance of the saying that the nature of
the real Guru is that of the Supreme Lord (Sarveshwara)?
In the case of the individual soul, which desires to attain
the state of true knowledge or the state of Godhood (Ishwara)\n--- 第52页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 51
and with that object always practises devotion, the Lord who
is the witness of that individual soul and identical with it,
comes forth, when the individual’s devotion has reached a
mature stage, in human form with the help of sat-chit-ananda.
These three natural features, and form and name which he
also graciously assumes, and in the guise of blessing the
disciple, absorbs him in Himself. According to this doctrine
the Guru can truly be called the Lord.
8. How then did some great persons attain knowledge
without a Guru?
To a few mature persons the Lord shines as the light of
knowledge and imparts awareness of the truth.
9. What is the end of devotion (bhakti) and the path of
Siddhanta (i.e., Saiva Siddhanta)?
It is to learn the truth that all one’s actions performed with
unselfish devotion, with the aid of the three purified
instruments (body, speech and mind), in the capacity of the
servant of the Lord, become the Lord’s actions, and to stand
forth free from the sense of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. This is also the
truth of what the Saiva Siddhantins call parabhakti (supreme
devotion) or living in the service of God (irai-pani-nittral).
10. What is the end of the path of knowledge (jnana) or
Vedanta?
It is to know the truth that the ‘I’ is not different from the
Lord (Ishwara) and to be free from the feeling of being the
doer (kartritva, ahamkara).
11. How can it be said that the end of both these paths is the
same?
Whatever the means, the destruction of the sense ‘I’ and
‘mine’ is the goal, and as these are interdependent, the\n--- 第53页 ---\ndestruction of either of them causes the destruction of the
other; therefore in order to achieve that state of silence which
is beyond thought and word, either the path of knowledge
which removes the sense of ‘I’ or the path of devotion which
removes the sense of ‘mine’, will suffice. So there is no doubt
that the end of the paths of devotion and knowledge is one
and the same.
Note: So long as the ‘I’ exists it is necessary to accept the
Lord also. If any one wishes to regain easily the supreme state
of identity (sayujya) now lost to him, it is only proper that he
should accept this conclusion.
12. What is the mark of the ego?
The individual soul of the form of ‘I’ is the ego. The Self
which is of the nature of intelligence (chit) has no sense
of ‘I’. Nor does the insentient body possess a sense of ‘I’.
The mysterious appearance of a delusive ego between
the intelligent and the insentient, being the root cause of
all these troubles, upon its destruction by whatever means,
that which really exists will be seen as it is. This is called
liberation (moksha).\n--- 第54页 ---\nCHAPTER II
PRACTICE
(Abhyasa)
1. What is the method of practice?
As the Self of a person who tries to attain Self-realization
is not different from him and as there is nothing other than or
superior to him to be attained by him, Self-realization being
only the realization of one’s own nature, the seeker of
liberation realizes, without doubts or misconceptions, his real
nature by distinguishing the eternal from the transient, and
never swerves from his natural state. This is known as the
practice of knowledge. This is the enquiry leading to Self-
realization.
2. Can this path of enquiry be followed by all aspirants?
This is suitable only for ripe souls. The rest should follow
different methods according to the state of their minds.
3. What are the other methods?
They are (1) stuti, (2) japa, (3) dhyana, (4) yoga,
(5) jnana, etc.
(1) Stuti is singing the praises of the Lord with a great
feeling of devotion.
(2) Japa is uttering the names of the gods or sacred
mantras like Om either mentally or verbally. (While following
the methods of stuti and japa the mind will sometimes be
concentrated (lit., closed) and sometimes diffused (lit. open).
The vagaries of the mind will not be evident to those who
follow these methods).\n--- 第55页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 54
(3) Dhyana denotes the repetition of the names, etc.,
mentally (japa) with feelings of devotion. In this method the
state of the mind will be understood easily. For the mind does
not become concentrated and diffused simultaneously. When
one is in dhyana it does not contact the objects of the senses,
and when it is in contact with the objects it is not in dhyana.
Therefore those who are in this state can observe the vagaries
of the mind then and there and by stopping the mind from
thinking other thoughts, fix it in dhyana. Perfection in dhyana
is the state of abiding in the Self (lit., abiding in the form of
‘That’ — tadakaranilai) .
As meditation functions in an exceedingly subtle manner
at the source of the mind it is not difficult to perceive its rise
and subsidence.
(4) Yoga: The source of the breath is the same as that of
the mind; therefore the subsidence of either leads effortlessly
to that of the other. The practice of stilling the mind through
breath control (pranayama) is called yoga.
Fixing their minds on psychic centres such as the sahasrara
(lit., the thousand-petalled lotus) yogis remain for any length
of time without awareness of their bodies. As long as this
state continues they appear to be immersed in some kind of
joy. But when the mind which has become tranquil emerges
(becomes active again) it resumes its worldly thoughts. It is
therefore necessary to train it with the help of practices like
dhyana, whenever it becomes externalised. It will then attain
a state in which there is neither subsidence nor emergence.
(5) Jnana is the annihilation of the mind in which it is
made to assume the form of the Self through the constant
practice of dhyana or enquiry (vichara). The extinction of
the mind is the state in which there is a cessation of all efforts.
Those who are established in this state never swerve from\n--- 第56页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 55
their true state. The terms ‘silence’ (mauna) and inaction refer
to this state alone.
Note: All practices are followed only with the object of
concentrating the mind. As all the mental activities like
remembering, forgetting, desiring, hating, attracting,
discarding, etc., are modifications of the mind, they cannot
be one’s true state. Simple, changeless being is one’s true
nature. Therefore to know the truth of one’s being and to be
it, is known as release from bondage and the destruction of
the knot (granthi nasam). Until this state of tranquillity of
mind is firmly attained, the practice of unswerving abidance
in the Self and keeping the mind unsoiled by various thoughts
is essential for an aspirant.
Although the practices for achieving strength of mind are
numerous, all of them achieve the same end. For it can be
seen that whoever concentrates his mind on any object, will,
on the cessation of all mental concepts, ultimately remain
merely as that object. This is called successful meditation
(dhyana siddhi). Those who follow the path of enquiry realize
that the mind which remains at the end of the enquiry is
Brahman. Those who practise meditation realize that the mind
which remains at the end of the meditation is the object of
their meditation. As the result is the same in either case it is
the duty of aspirants to practise continuously either of these
methods till the goal is reached.
4. Is the state of ‘being still’ a state involving effort or
effortlessness?
It is not an effortless state of indolence. All mundane
activities which are ordinarily called effort are performed with
the aid of a portion of the mind and with frequent breaks. But
the act of communion with the Self (atma vyavahara) or\n--- 第57页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 56
remaining still inwardly is intense activity which is performed
with the entire mind and without break.
Maya (delusion or ignorance) which cannot be destroyed
by any other act is completely destroyed by this intense activity
which is called ‘silence’ (mauna).
5. What is the nature of maya?
Maya is that which makes us regard as nonexistent the Self,
the Reality, which is always and everywhere present, all-
pervasive and Self-luminous, and as existent the individual soul
(jiva), the world (jagat), and God (para) which have been
conclusively proved to be nonexistent at all times and places.
6. As the Self shines fully of its own accord why is it not
generally recognised like the other objects of the world
by all persons?
Wherever particular objects are known it is the Self which
has known itself in the form of those objects. For what is
known as knowledge or awareness is only the potency of the
Self (atma shakti). The Self is the only sentient object. There
is nothing apart from the Self. If there are such objects they
are all insentient and therefore cannot either know themselves
or mutually know one another. It is because the Self does not
know its true nature in this manner that it seems to be immersed
and struggling in the ocean of birth (and death) in the form of
the individual soul.
7. Although the Lord is all-pervasive it appears, from
passages like ‘adoring him through His grace’, that He
can be known only through His grace. How then can the
individual soul by its own efforts attain Self-realization
in the absence of the Lord’s grace?
As the Lord denotes the Self and as grace means the Lord’s
presence or revelation, there is no time when the Lord remains\n--- 第58页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 57
unknown. If the light of the sun is invisible to the owl it is
only the fault of that bird and not of the sun. Similarly, can
the unawareness of the Self — which is always of the nature
of awareness — by the ignorant, be other than their own fault?
How can it be the fault of the Self? It is because grace is of
the very nature of the Lord that He is well known as ‘the
blessed grace’. Therefore the Lord, whose nature itself is grace,
does not have to bestow His grace. Nor is there any particular
time for bestowing His grace.
8. What part of the body is the abode of the Self?
The Heart on the right side of the chest is generally
indicated. This is because we usually point to the right side of
the chest when we refer to ourselves. Some say that the
sahasrara (the thousand-petalled lotus) is the abode of the
Self. But if that were true the head should not fall forward
when we go to sleep or faint.
9. What is the nature of the Heart?
The sacred texts describing it say:
Between the two breasts, below the chest and above the
abdomen, there are six organs of different colours1. One of
them resembling the bud of a water lily and situated two digits
to the right is the Heart. It is inverted and within it is a tiny
orifice which is the seat of dense darkness (ignorance) full of
desires. All the psychic nerves (nadis) depend upon it. It is
the abode of the vital forces, the mind and the light (of
consciousness).2
But, although it is described thus, the meaning of the word
Heart (hridayam) is the Self (Atman). As it is denoted by the
1 These are not the same as the chakras.
2 See Reality in Forty Verses: Supplement, 18-19.\n--- 第59页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 58
terms existence, consciousness, bliss, eternal and plenum (sat,
chit, anandam, nityam, purnam) it has no differences such as
exterior and interior or up and down. That tranquil state in
which all thoughts come to an end is called the state of the
Self. When it is realized as it is, there is no scope for
discussions about its location inside the body or outside.
10. Why do thoughts of many objects arise in the mind even
when there is no contact with external objects?
All such thoughts are due to latent tendencies (purva
samskaras). They appear only to the individual consciousness
(jiva) which has forgotten its real nature and become
externalised. Whenever particular things are perceived, the
enquiry ‘Who is it that sees them?’ should be made; they will
then disappear at once.
11. How do the triple factors (i.e., knower, known and
knowledge), which are absent in deep sleep, samadhi,
etc., manifest themselves in the Self (in the states of waking
and dreaming)?
From the Self there arise in succession:
(i) Chidabhasa (reflected consciousness) which is a kind
of luminosity.
(ii) Jiva (the individual consciousness) or the seer or the
first concept.
(iii) Phenomena, that is the world.
12. Since the Self is free from the notions of knowledge
and ignorance how can it be said to pervade the entire
body in the shape of sentience or to impart sentience to
the senses?
Wise men say that there is a connection between the source
of the various psychic nerves and the Self, that this is the knot\n--- 第60页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 59
of the Heart, that the connection between the sentient and the
insentient will exist until this is cut asunder with the aid of
true knowledge, that just as the subtle and invisible force of
electricity travels through wires and does many wonderful
things, so the force of the Self also travels through the psychic
nerves and, pervading the entire body, imparts sentience to
the senses, and that if this knot is cut, the Self will remain as
it always is, without any attributes.
13. How can there be a connection between the Self which
is pure knowledge and the triple factors which are
relative knowledge?
This is, in a way, like the working of a cinema (see next page).
Just as the pictures appear on the screen as long as the
film throws the shadows through the lens, so the phenomenal
world will continue to appear to the individual in the waking
and dream states as long as there are latent mental
impressions. Just as the lens magnifies the tiny specks on
the film to a huge size and as a number of pictures are shown
in a second, so the mind enlarges the sprout-like tendencies
into treelike thoughts and shows in a second innumerable
worlds. Again, just as there is only the light of the lamp
visible when there is no film, so the Self alone shines without
the triple factors when the mental concepts in the form of
tendencies are absent in the states of deep sleep, swoon and
samadhi. Just as the lamp illumines the lens, etc., while
remaining unaffected, the Self illumines the ego
(Chidabhasa), etc., while remaining unaffected.
14. What is dhyana (meditation)?
It is abiding as one’s Self without swerving in any way
from one’s real nature and without feeling that one is
meditating. As one is not in the least conscious of the different\n--- 第61页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 60
CINEMA SHOW SELF
1) The lamp inside (the The Self.
apparatus).
2) The lens in front of The pure (sattvic) mind
the lamp. close to the Self.
3) The film which is a The stream of latent
long series of separate tendencies consisting
photos. of subtle thoughts.
4) The lens, the light The mind, the illumina-
passing through it and -tion of it and the Self,
the lamp, which together which together form the
form the focused light. seer or the jiva.
5) The light passing through The light of the Self
the lens and falling on emerging from the mind
the screen. through the senses, and
falling on the world.
6) The various kinds of The various forms and
pictures appearing in the names appearing as the
light of the screen. objects perceived in the
light of the world.
7) The mechanism which The divine law mani-
sets the film in motion. festing the latent
tendencies of the mind.\n--- 第62页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 61
states (waking, dreaming, etc.) in this condition, the sleep
(noticeable) here is also regarded as dhyana.
15. What is the difference between dhyana and samadhi?
Dhyana is achieved through deliberate mental effort; in
samadhi there is no such effort.
16. What are the factors to be kept in view in dhyana?
It is important for one who is established in his Self (atma
nishta) to see that he does not swerve in the least from this
absorption. By swerving from his true nature he may see
before him bright effulgences, etc., or hear (unusual) sounds
or regard as real the visions of gods appearing within or
outside himself. He should not be deceived by these and
forget himself.
Note: If the moments that are wasted in thinking of the
objects which are not the Self, are spent on enquiry into the
Self, Self-realization will be attained in a very short time.
Until the mind becomes established in itself some kind of
bhavana (contemplation of a personified god or goddess with
deep emotion and religious feeling) is essential. Otherwise the
mind will be frequently assailed by wayward thoughts or sleep.
Without spending all the time in practising bhavanas like
‘I am Siva’ or ‘I am Brahman’, which are regarded as
nirgunopasana (contemplation of the attributeless Brahman),
the method of enquiry into oneself should be practised as soon
as the mental strength which is the result of such upasana,
(contemplation) is attained.
The excellence of the practice (sadhana) lies in not giving
room for even a single mental concept (vritti).
17. What are the rules of conduct which an aspirant (sadhaka)
should follow?\n--- 第63页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 62
Moderation in food, moderation in sleep and moderation
in speech.
18. How long should one practise?
Until the mind attains effortlessly its natural state of
freedom from concepts, that is till the sense of ‘I’ and ‘mine’
exists no longer.
19. What is the meaning of dwelling in solitude (ekantavasa)?
As the Self is all-pervasive it has no particular place for
solitude. The state of being free from mental concepts is called
‘dwelling in solitude’.
20. What is the sign of wisdom (viveka)?
Its beauty lies in remaining free from delusion after
realising the truth once. There is fear only for one who sees
even a slight difference in the Supreme Brahman. So long as
there is the idea that the body is the Self one cannot be a
realizer of truth whoever he might be.
21. If everything happens according to karma (prarabdha,
the result of one’s acts in the past) how is one to overcome
the obstacles to meditation (dhyana)?
Prarabdha concerns only the out-turned, not the in-turned
mind. One who seeks his real Self will not be afraid of
any obstacle.
22. Is asceticism (sannyasa) one of the essential requisites for
a person to become established in the Self (atmanishta)?
The effort that is made to get rid of attachment to one’s
body is really towards abiding in the Self. Maturity of thought
and enquiry alone removes attachment to the body, not the
stations of life (ashramas), such as student (brahmachari),
etc. For the attachment is in the mind while the stations pertain\n--- 第64页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 63
to the body. How can bodily stations remove the attachment
in the mind? As maturity of thought and enquiry pertain to
the mind, these alone can, by enquiry on the part of the same
mind, remove the attachments which have crept into it through
thoughtlessness. But, as the discipline of asceticism
(sannyasashrama) is the means for attaining dispassion
(vairagya), and as dispassion is the means for enquiry, joining
an order of ascetics may be regarded, in a way, as a means of
enquiry through dispassion. Instead of wasting one’s life
by entering the order of ascetics before one is fit for it, it is
better to live the householder’s life. In order to fix the mind in
the Self which is its true nature it is necessary to separate it
from the family of fancies (sankalpas) and doubts (vikalpas),
that is to renounce the family (samsara) in the mind. This is
real asceticism.
23. It is an established rule that so long as there is the least
idea of ‘I-am-the-doer,’ Self-knowledge cannot be attained,
but is it possible for an aspirant who is a householder to
discharge his duties properly without this sense?
As there is no rule that action should depend upon a sense
of being the doer it is unnecessary to doubt whether any action
will take place without a doer or an act of doing. Although
the officer of a government treasury may appear, in the eyes
of others, to be doing his duty attentively and responsibly all
day long, he will be discharging his duties without attachment,
thinking ‘I have no real connection with all this money’ and
without a sense of involvement in his mind. In the same manner
a wise householder may also discharge without attachment the
various household duties which fall to his lot according to his
past karma, like a tool in the hands of another. Action and
knowledge are not obstacles to each other.\n--- 第65页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 64
24. Of what use to his family is a wise householder who is
unmindful of his bodily comforts and of what use is his
family to him?
Although he is entirely unmindful of his bodily comforts,
if, owing to his past karma, his family has to subsist by his
efforts, he may be regarded as doing service to others. If it
is asked whether the wise man derives any benefit from the
discharge of domestic duties, it may be answered that, as he
has already attained the state of complete satisfaction which
is the sum total of all benefits and the highest good of all, he
does not stand to gain anything more by discharging family
duties.
25. How can cessation of activity (nivritti) and peace of mind
be attained in the midst of household duties which are of
the nature of constant activity?
As the activities of the wise man exist only in the eyes
of others and not in his own, although he may be
accomplishing immense tasks, he really does nothing.
Therefore his activities do not stand in the way of inaction
and peace of mind. For he knows the truth that all activities
take place in his mere presence and that he does nothing.
Hence he will remain as the silent witness of all the
activities taking place.
26. Just as the sage’s past karma is the cause of his present
activities will not the impressions (vasanas) caused by
his present activities adhere to him in future?
Only one who is free from all the latent tendencies
(vasanas) is a sage. That being so how can the tendencies of
karma affect him who is entirely unattached to activity?\n--- 第66页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 65
27. What is the meaning of brahmacharya?
Only enquiry into Brahman should be called
brahmacharya.
28. Will the practice of brahmacharya which is followed in
conformity with the (four) orders of life (ashramas) be a
means of knowledge?
As the various means of knowledge, such as control of
senses, etc., are included in brahmacharya, the virtuous
practices duly followed by those who belong to the order of
students (brahmacharins) are very helpful for their
improvement.
29. Can one enter the order of ascetics (sannyasa) directly
from the order of students (brahmacharya)?
Those who are competent need not formally enter the orders
of brahmacharya, etc., in the order laid down. One who has
realized his Self does not distinguish between the various
orders of life. Therefore no order of life either helps or hinders
him.
30. Does an aspirant (sadhaka) lose anything by not observing
the rules of caste and orders of life?
As the attainment (anusthana, lit., practice) of knowledge
is the supreme end of all other practices, there is no rule that
one who remains in any one order of life and constantly
acquires knowledge is bound to follow the rules laid down
for that order of life. If he follows the rules of caste and orders
of life he does so for the good of the world. He does not
derive any benefit by observing the rules. Nor does he lose
anything by not observing them.\n--- 第67页 ---\n66
CHAPTER III
EXPERIENCE
(Anubhava)
1. What is the light of consciousness?
It is the Self-luminous existence-consciousness which
reveals to the seer the world of names and forms both inside
and outside. The existence of this existence-consciousness can
be inferred by the objects illuminated by it. It does not become
the object of consciousness.
2. What is knowledge (vijnana)?
It is that tranquil state of existence-consciousness which is
experienced by the aspirant and which is like the waveless
ocean or the motionless ether.
3. What is bliss?
It is the experience of joy (or peace) in the state of
vijnana, free of all activities and similar to deep sleep. This
is also called the state of kevala nirvikalpa (remaining
without concepts).
4. What is the state beyond bliss?
It is the state of unceasing peace of mind which is found in
the state of absolute quiescence, jagrat-sushupti (lit., sleep
with awareness) which resembles inactive deep sleep. In this
state, in spite of the activity of the body and the senses, there
is no external awareness, like a child immersed in sleep1 (who
1 The acts of sleeping children like eating and drinking are acts only in the eyes
of others and not in their own. They do not therefore really do those acts in
spite of their appearing to do them.\n--- 第68页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 67
is not conscious of the food given to him by his mother). A
yogi who is in this state is inactive even while engaged in
activity. This is also called sahaja nirvikalpa samadhi (natural
state of absorption in oneself without concepts).
5. What is the authority for saying that the entire moving
and unmoving worlds depend upon oneself?
The Self means the embodied being. It is only after the
energy, which was latent in the state of deep sleep, emerges
with the idea of ‘I’ that all objects are experienced. The Self
is present in all perceptions as the perceiver. There are no
objects to be seen when the ‘I’ is absent. For all these reasons
it may undoubtedly be said that everything comes out of the
Self and goes back to the Self.
6. As the bodies and the selves animating them are
everywhere actually observed to be innumerable how can
it be said that the Self is only one?
If the idea ‘I am the body’ is accepted2, the selves are
multiple. The state in which this idea vanishes is the Self,
since in that state there are no other objects. It is for this reason
that the Self is regarded as one only.
7. What is the authority for saying that Brahman can be
apprehended by the mind and at the same time that it
cannot be apprehended by the mind?
It cannot be apprehended by the impure mind but can be
apprehended by the pure mind.
8. What is pure mind and what is impure mind?
2 The idea that one is one’s body is what is called hrdaya-granthi (knot of the
Heart). Of the various knots, this one, which binds together what is conscious
with what is insentient, is what causes bondage.\n--- 第69页 ---\nWhen the indefinable power of Brahman separates itself
from Brahman and, in union with the reflection of
consciousness (Chidabhasa) assumes various forms, it is called
the impure mind. When it becomes free from the reflection
of consciousness (abhasa), through discrimination, it is called
the pure mind. Its state of union with the Brahman is its
apprehension of Brahman. The energy which is accompanied
by the reflection of consciousness is called the impure mind
and its state of separation from Brahman is its non-
apprehension of Brahman.
9. Is it possible to overcome, even while the body exists,
the karma (prarabdha) which is said to last till the end of
the body?
Yes. If the agent (doer) upon whom the karma depends,
namely the ego, which has come into existence between the
body and the Self, merges in its source and loses its form,
will the karma which depends upon it alone survive? Therefore
when there is no ‘I’ there is no karma.
10. As the Self is existence and consciousness, what is the
reason for describing it as different from the existent and
the nonexistent, the sentient and the insentient?
Although the Self is real, as it comprises everything, it
does not give room for questions involving duality about its
reality or unreality. Therefore it is said to be different from
the real and the unreal. Similarly, even though it is
consciousness, since there is nothing for it to know or to make
itself known to, it is said to be different from the sentient and
the insentient.\n--- 第70页 ---\nCHAPTER IV
ATTAINMENT
(Arudha)
1. What is the state of attainment of knowledge?
It is firm and effortless abidance in the Self in which the
mind which has become one with the Self does not
subsequently emerge again at any time. That is, just as
everyone usually and naturally has the idea, ‘I am not a goat
nor a cow nor any other animal but a human’, when he thinks
of his body, so also when he has the idea ‘I am not the
principles (tattwas) beginning with the body and ending with
sound (nada), but the Self which is existence, consciousness
and bliss, the innate self-consciousness (atma prajna)’, he is
said to have attained firm knowledge.
2. To which of the seven stages of knowledge (jnana
bhoomikas)1 does the sage (jnani) belong?
He belongs to the fourth stage.
1 The seven jnana bhoomikas are:
(i). subheccha (the desire for enlightenment).
(ii). vicharana (enquiry).
(iii). tanumanasa (tenuous mind).
(iv). satwapatti (self-realization).
(v). asamsakti (non-attachment).
(vi). padarthabhavana (non-perception of objects).
(vii). turyaga (transcendence).
Those who have attained the last four bhoomikas are called brahmavid,
brahmavidvara, brahmavidvariya and brahmavidvaristha respectively.\n--- 第71页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 70
3. If that is so why have three more stages superior to it
been distinguished?
The marks of the stages four to seven are based upon the
experiences of the realized person (jivanmukta). They are not
states of knowledge and release. So far as knowledge and
release are concerned no distinction whatever is made in these
four stages.
4. As liberation is common to all, why is the varistha (lit.,
the most excellent) alone praised excessively?
So far as the varistha’s common experience of bliss is
concerned, he is extolled only because of the special merit
acquired by him in his previous births, which is the cause of it.
5. As there is no one who does not desire to experience
constant bliss what is the reason why all sages (jnanis)
do not attain the state of varistha?
It is not to be attained by mere desire or effort. Karma
(prarabdha) is its cause. As the ego dies along with its cause
even in the fourth stage (bhoomika), what agent is there beyond
that stage to desire anything or to make efforts? So long as
they make efforts they will not be sages (jnanis). Do the sacred
texts (srutis) which specially mention the varistha say that
the other three are unenlightened persons?
6. As some sacred texts say that the supreme state is that in
which the sense organs and the mind are completely
destroyed, how can that state be compatible with the
experience of the body and the senses?
If that were so there would not be any difference between
that state and the state of deep sleep. Further, how can it be
said to be the natural state when it exists at one time and not
at another? This happens, as stated before, to some persons
according to their karma (prarabdha) for some time or till\n--- 第72页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 71
death. It cannot properly be regarded as the final state. If it
could it would mean that all great souls and the Lord, who
were the authors of the Vedantic works (jnana granthas) and
the Vedas, were unenlightened persons. If the supreme state
is that in which neither the senses nor the mind exist and not
the state in which they exist, how can it be the perfect state
(paripurnam)? As karma alone is responsible for the activity
or inactivity of the sages, great souls have declared the state
of sahaja nirvikalpa (the natural state without concepts) alone
to be the ultimate state.
7. What is the difference between ordinary sleep and waking
sleep (jagrat sushupti)?
In ordinary sleep there are not only no thoughts but also
no awareness. In waking sleep there is awareness alone. That
is why it is called awake while sleeping, that is, the sleep in
which there is awareness.
8. Why is the Self described both as the fourth state (turiya)
and beyond the fourth state (turiyatita)?
Turiya means that which is the fourth. The experiencers
(jivas) of the three states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep,
known as visva, taijasa and prajna, who wander successively
in these three states, are not the Self. It is with the object of
making this clear, namely that the Self is that which is different
from them and which is the witness of these states, that it is
called the fourth (turiya). When this is known, the three
experiencers disappear and the idea that the Self is a witness,
that it is the fourth, also disappears. That is why the Self is
described as beyond the fourth (turiyatita).
9. What is the benefit derived by the sage from the sacred
books (srutis)?
The sage who is the embodiment of the truths mentioned
in the scriptures has no use for them.\n--- 第73页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 72
10. Is there any connection between the attainment of
supernatural powers (siddhis) and liberation (mukti)?
Enlightened enquiry alone leads to liberation. Supernatural
powers are all illusory appearances created by the power of
maya (mayashakti). Self-realization which is permanent is
the only true accomplishment (siddhi). Accomplishments
which appear and disappear, being the effect of maya, cannot
be real. They are accomplished with the object of enjoying
fame, pleasures, etc. They come unsought to some persons
through their karma. Know that union with Brahman is the
real aim of all accomplishments. This is also the state of
liberation (aikya mukti) known as union (sayujya).
11. If this is the nature of liberation (moksha) why do some
scriptures connect it with the body and say that the
individual soul can attain liberation only when it does
not leave the body?
It is only if bondage is real that liberation and the nature
of its experiences have to be considered. So far as the Self
(Purusha) is concerned it has really no bondage in any of
the four states. As bondage is merely a verbal assumption
according to the emphatic proclamation of the Vedanta
system, how can the question of liberation, which depends
upon the question of bondage, arise when there is no
bondage? Without knowing this truth, to enquire into the
nature of bondage and liberation, is like enquiring into the
nonexistent height, colour, etc., of a barren woman’s son or
the horns of a hare.
12. If that is so, do not the descriptions of bondage and release
found in the scriptures become irrelevant and untrue?
No, they do not. On the contrary, the delusion of bondage
fabricated by ignorance from time immemorial can be\n--- 第74页 ---\nSpiritual Instruction 73
removed only by knowledge, and for this purpose the term
‘liberation’ (mukti) has been usually accepted. That is all. The
fact that the characteristics of liberation are described in
different ways proves that they are imaginary.
13. If that is so, are not all efforts such as study (lit., hearing)
reflection, etc., useless?
No, they are not. The firm conviction that there is neither
bondage nor liberation is the supreme purpose of all efforts.
As this purpose of seeing boldly, through direct experience,
that bondage and liberation do not exist, cannot be achieved
except with the aid of the aforesaid practices, these efforts
are useful.
14. Is there any authority for saying that there is neither
bondage nor liberation?
This is decided on the strength of experience and not merely
on the strength of the scriptures.
15. If it is experienced how is it experienced?
‘Bondage’ and ‘liberation’ are mere linguistic terms.
They have no reality of their own. Therefore they cannot
function of their own accord. It is necessary to accept the
existence of some basic thing of which they are the
modifications. If one enquires, ‘for whom is there bondage
and liberation?’ it will be seen, ‘they are for me’. If one
enquires, ‘Who am I?’, one will see that there is no such
thing as the ‘I’. It will then be as clear as an amalaka fruit
in one’s hand that what remains is one’s real being. As this
truth will be naturally and clearly experienced by those
who leave aside mere verbal discussions and enquire into
themselves inwardly, there is no doubt that all realized
persons uniformly see neither bondage nor liberation so
far as the true Self is concerned.\n--- 第75页 ---\n16. If truly there is neither bondage nor liberation what is
the reason for the actual experience of joys and sorrows?
They appear to be real only when one turns aside from
one’s real nature. They do not really exist.
17. Is it possible for everyone to know directly without doubt
what exactly is one’s true nature?
Undoubtedly it is possible.
18. How?
It is the experience of everyone that even in the states of
deep sleep, fainting, etc., when the entire universe, moving
and stationary, beginning with earth and ending with the
unmanifested (prakriti), disappear, he does not disappear.
Therefore the state of pure being which is common to all and
which is always experienced directly by everybody is one’s
true nature. The conclusion is that all experiences in the
enlightened as well as the ignorant state, which may be
described by newer and newer words, are opposed to one’s
real nature.\n--- 第76页 ---\nPOEMS
4
Five Hymns to Arunachala
T
he Five Hymns to Arunachala are the earliest poems of
the Maharshi except for a few short verses. They were
written about 1914, that is when he was about thirty-five years
old (he was born in December 1879). He was still living in
Virupaksha Cave on the hill. Some of his followers who were
sadhus used to go into the town of Tiruvannamalai daily to
beg for food. One day they asked the Maharshi to compose a
song for them to sing as they went. At first he refused, saying
that there were already plenty of songs by the ancient Saivite
saints. They continued to press him, however, and he began to
compose a song with a refrain at the end of each and every
stanza.
One day he started to go round the hill, with Palaniswami
walking behind him. After he had gone some way Aiyaswami
seems to have called Palaniswami back and given him a pencil
and paper, saying, “For some days now Swami has been
composing stanzas everyday. He may do so today as well, so
you had better take this paper and pencil with you.” That day
Sri Bhagavan practically completed the Marital Garland of
Letters, the first of the five hymns. It tells in glowing symbolism
of the love and union between the human soul and God, and
is among the most profound and moving poems in any\n--- 第77页 ---\nFive Hymns to Arunachala 76
language. Although he who wrote it was established in the bliss
of indissoluble Union, it was written for the sake of devotees
and expresses the attitude of devotion and aspiration.
The second, third and fourth poems (hymns) were written
at about the same time, and they also adopt the same attitude.
Whereas the later poems of the Maharshi are more doctrinal,
these hymns are more emotional, expressing more the attitude
of devotion and aspiration.
The Eleven Verses and the Eight Stanzas are among the
very few poems of the Maharshi that were written quite
spontaneously without any request, as he himself said when
speaking of them:
The only poems that came to me spontaneously and
compelled me, as it were, to write them without any one
urging me to do so are the Eleven Verses to Sri Arunachala
and the Eight Stanzas to Sri Arunachala. The opening words
of the Eleven Stanzas came to me one morning and even
though I tried to suppress them saying, “What have I to do
with these words?” they would not be suppressed till I
composed a song bringing them in; and all the words flowed
easily, without any effort. The remaining stanzas except
two were also composed in the same way.
Shortly afterwards Narayana Reddi came. He was at
that time living in Vellore as an agent of Singer & Co., and
he used to come from time to time. Aiyasami and Palani
told him about the poems and he said, ‘Give them to me at
once and I will go and get them printed.’ He had already
published some books. When he insisted on taking the
poems I told him he could do so and could publish the first
eleven as one form of poem and the rest, which were in a
different metre, as another. To make up the required quota\n--- 第78页 ---\nFive Hymns to Arunachala 77
I at once composed two more stanzas and he took all the
nineteen stanzas with him to get them published.1
The fifth hymn, Arunachala Pancharatna, is of a different
nature to the first four. The great Sanskrit poet and devotee
Ganapati Sastri, who was a follower of Bhagavan, begged
him to write a poem in Sanskrit. Bhagavan replied, laughing,
that he scarcely knew any Sanskrit and no Sanskrit metres.
Sastri, however, explained a metre to him and repeated his
request. Bhagavan then composed a poem of five stanzas, two
on one day and three on the following day. They were all in
perfect, flawless Sanskrit. It is a cryptic account of the different
paths to Realization and therefore a commentary has been
included with the translation. This hymn is chanted daily at
the time of Veda Parayana.
It is to be understood that in all these hymns the word
‘Arunachala’ means God and nothing less. It also, however,
means the physical hill of Arunachala in South India where
God is peculiarly manifested for the Maharshi and his
disciples. From ancient times various spiritual centres in India
have represented various paths and modes of doctrine, and
Arunachala among them the doctrine of advaita and the path
of Self-enquiry. Although the ultimate doctrine and the
supreme and most direct path, this, throughout the ages, has
not been the most popular, because for most people it seemed
too austere and difficult. The Maharshi attained Realization
through a spontaneous act of Self-enquiry, with no human
guru. There is no place to do more than touch upon the mystery
of this here. It is sufficient to note that the Maharshi agreed
with all other masters that a guru is necessary, adding however
that the guru need not necessarily take human form. When he
left home as a youth who was already a Sage, Arunachala
1 Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-knowledge, by Arthur Osborne.\n--- 第79页 ---\nFive Hymns to Arunachala 78
drew him like a powerful magnet. He went straight there and
stayed there for the rest of his life. It was Arunachala that he
regarded as his guru, and these hymns are written to
Arunachala, to the Guru, to God manifested, to the Absolute.
Through the potent grace of Bhagavan Ramana Maharshi,
the path of Self-enquiry was brought within the competence
of men and women of this age, was indeed fashioned into a
new path that can be followed anonymously in the conditions
of the modern world, with no forms or ritual, nothing to
distinguish a person outwardly from the world wherein he
moves. This creation of a new path to suit the needs of the age
has made Arunachala the spiritual centre of the world. More
than ever, now that he has shed his physical body and is one
with Arunachala, the grace and guidance that emanates from
him to those who turn to him and seek his aid is centred at
Arunachala. It is the holy place and many are drawn there,
both those who were disciples of the Maharshi in his lifetime
and those who have come later.
It remains to be said that the literary Tamil in which the
hymns were written can be used in an extremely cryptic manner
and the first hymn especially abounds in passages which can
be understood in more than one manner. In such cases the
alternative readings are given.
Before coming to the Five Hymns we print first a verse
that Sri Bhagavan wrote on Sri Ganesa, as being an auspicious
opening to the poems. After this comes a verse that Sri
Muruganar wrote on the significance of Arunachala and
another one by Bhagavan on the significance of the beacon
that is lit on its summit every year at the festival of Deepam.
Only after this follow the Five Hymns.\n--- 第80页 ---\nFive Hymns to Arunachala 79
To Sri Ganesa
One day in l912, a potter came to the Virupaksha Cave
with a small image of Sri Ganesa that he had made and
presented it to Sri Bhagavan. Easwara Swami suggested that
both he and Sri Bhagavan should write a verse each to
celebrate the occasion. This is what Sri Bhagavan wrote:
He who begot you as a child you made
Into a beggar; as a child yourself
You then lived everywhere just to support
Your own huge belly; I too am a child.
Oh Child God in that niche! Encountering one
Born after you, is your heart made of stone?
I pray you look at me!
Significance of Arunachala
The sudden rise of the blazing column of Annamalai1 in
front of Brahma and Vishnu and their utter distress at not
being able to know the same is symbolic of the sphurana
of the Heart centre as the real Self of the intellect and
the ego.
Significance of the Beacon
Getting rid of the ‘I am the body’ idea and merging
the mind into the Heart to realize the Self as non-dual
being and the light of all is the real significance of darshan of
the beacon of light on Annamalai, the centre of the universe.
1 Annamalai is another name for Arunachala.