\n--- 第1页 ---\nDAY BY DAY WITH
BHAGAVAN
From the Diary of
A. DEVARAJA MUDALIAR
SRI RAMANASRAMAM
TIRUVANNAMALAI
2002\n--- 第2页 ---\n© Sri Ramanasramam, Tiruvannamalai
First Combined Reprint in 1968 (3000)
Second Reprint 1977 (5000)
Third Reprint 1989 (3000)
Fourth Reprint 1995 (3000)
Fifth Reprint 2002 (3000)
ISBN: 81-88018-82-1
Price: Rs.
CC No: 1013
Published by
V.S. Ramanan
President, Board of Trustees
Sri Ramanasramam
Tiruvannamalai 606 603
Tamil Nadu
India
Tel: 91-4175-37292
Fax: 91-4175-37491
Email: ashram@ramana-maharshi.org
Website: http://www.ramana-maharshi.org\n--- 第3页 ---\nPREFACE
A word as to the origin of this work may not be out of
place. It was my great good fortune to live for more than four
years, from August 1942 till the end of 1946, at Sri
Ramanasramam and to have the inestimable benefit of daily
contact with our Bhagavan. After I had been there for some
months various people who visited the Asramam began to
suggest that it would be a good thing if I recorded Bhagavan’s
utterances on spiritual topics, either in answer to questions
from visitors or in any other context. For a long time, however,
I was too lazy to make the effort. Nevertheless, whenever I
read the ‘Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa’, as I used
to now and then, I felt how desirable it was that a similar
book should be compiled in the case of our Bhagavan. When
I had drifted on like this for some years, on the morning of
January 1st, 1945, within the space of about an hour, three
different persons — a lawyer’s clerk, son of Sankara Ammal
doing service in the Asramam, a businessman of Madras by
name M.V.P. Sastri, whom I had known since his boyhood at
Chittoor, and O.P. Ramaswami Reddi, who later became Chief
Minister of Madras — all urged me to undertake the task as,
in their kind opinion, I was best fitted for it besides having
the necessary facility of constant close contact with Bhagavan.
The appeal coming from such widely different persons
on the first day of the year and all of them approaching me in
such quick succession and without any previous consultation
amongst themselves made such a deep impression on me that
I took it as a call really from Bhagavan. So, that very day I
started keeping an Asramam Diary. My idea was to preserve
for Bhagavan’s devotees all that took place in the Asramam\n--- 第4页 ---\nthat might be of interest or importance from one point of view
or another, and mainly Bhagavan’s answers to questions
addressed to him by visitors from all quarters of the globe,
for many of whom I acted as a sort of official translator in
Bhagavan’s Court.
I told Bhagavan of the circumstances under which I
started the work, thus asking for his blessing on it. Then I
obtained permission from the Sarvadhikari. Also, for the first
few days I read out to Bhagavan whatever I had recorded so
that he could correct me anywhere where I had gone wrong.
Even when I was interpreting Bhagavan to visitors, if I made
the slightest mistake Bhagavan would pull me up. Whenever
I myself was in doubt as to what Bhagavan meant I used to
ask for further clarification and Bhagavan willingly explained
things again for my benefit. After the first two or three days I
gave up reading my entries to Bhagavan daily, but on any day
when I was in doubt whether I had accurately recorded what
Bhagavan had said, I used to read out my entry for the day
and correct it wherever he indicated that it was necessary.
Only a part of these records of mine seems to be available
to the Asramam authorities for publication just now. I am glad
that at least so much is to be published by them immediately.
I believe they came into existence because Bhagavan willed
it and I believe it is his will that at least a part of them should
now appear in print. I hope and pray to Bhagavan that the
publication may prove not merely of interest but of great use
to those who read it and that he may bestow his grace on all
who go through it in earnestness and faith.
1st January 1952 A. DEVARAJA MUDALIAR\n--- 第5页 ---\nDay by Day with Bhagavan
________
1111166666-----33333-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
A visitor: Should I give up my business and take to
reading books on Vedanta?
Bhagavan: If the objects have an independent existence,
i.e., if they exist anywhere apart from you, then it may be
possible for you to go away from them. But they don’t exist
apart from you; they owe their existence to you, your thought.
So, where can you go, to escape them? As for reading books
on Vedanta, you may go on reading any number of them. They
can only tell you, ‘Realise the Self within you’. The Self cannot
be found in books. You have to find it out for yourself, in
yourself.
EEEEEvvvvveeeeennnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Almost the same question was put by another visitor in
the afternoon and Bhagavan said, “Where can you go, fleeing
from the world or objects? They are like the shadow of a man,
which the man cannot flee from. There is a funny story of a
man who wanted to bury his shadow. He dug a deep pit and,
seeing his shadow at the bottom, was glad he could bury it so
deep. He went on filling the pit and when he had completely
filled it up he was surprised and disappointed to find the
shadow on top. Even so, the objects or thoughts of them will
be with you always, till you realise the Self.”
1\n--- 第6页 ---\n1111177777-----33333-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Mr. T.P. Ramachandra Aiyar asked Bhagavan about the
meaning of Ao I° in the stanza of ‘Ds[Õ SôtTÕ’
(Reality in Forty Verses).
B: Ao I° means ¨û\kR I°. It refers to that light
of manas in which we see all the world, both the known and
the unknown of the world. There is first the white light, so to
call it, of the Self, which transcends both light and darkness.
In it no object can be seen. There is neither seer nor seen.
Then there is total darkness or avidya in which also no objects
are seen. But from the Self proceeds a reflected light, the light
of pure manas, and it is this light which gives room for the
existence of all the film of the world which is seen neither in
total light nor in total darkness, but only in the subdued or
reflected light. It is this light which is referred to in the stanza.
1111188888-----33333-----4444455555
On or about 15-3-45 Bhagavan had asked someone in the
hall to read aloud Bhakta Vijayam, to illustrate from the story
of Tulasi Das, how one totally immersed in sensual life,
suddenly recoils and goes to the other extreme of a highly
religious life. In the story, Tulasi Das runs away from wife and
home and is mad after Hari at Banaras. The wife and mother
go and entreat him to come back, reminding him of his great
love for them all. He takes no notice of them at all, but asks
them, “Has my Hari come? Yes. He is coming there!” etc. He
was mad after Hari alone and took interest in nothing else. When
this portion was being read out, Bhagavan said, “I was somewhat
like this at Madura. Going to school, books in hand, I would be
eagerly desiring and expecting that God would suddenly appear
before me in the sky; and so I would be looking up at the sky.
What sort of progress could such a one make in his studies at
school!”
2\n--- 第7页 ---\n[This was apparently shortly before he left Madura. I
have never heard before, either from Bhagavan or from others,
that he was so God-mad at Madura. So I record it here.]
1111199999-----33333-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
A visitor from Sind, very probably Kundanlal A.
Mahatani of Hyderabad, Sind, (now Pakistan) asked: “It is
said the world and the objects that we see are all unreal, like
the snake in the rope. It is also stated in other places that the
seer and the seen are the same. If the seer and the seen are
same, then how can we say that the seen is unreal?”
B.: All that is meant is that the seen regarded as an
independent entity, independent of the Self, is unreal. The
seen is not different from the seer. What exists is the one Self,
not a seer and a seen. The seen regarded as the Self is real.
V.: It is said the world is like a dream. But there is this
difference between dream and the waking state. In dream I
see my friends or relations and go through some experiences
with them. When I wake up and ask those friends or relations
whom I met in the dream about the dream, they know nothing
about it. But in the waking state what I see and hear is
corroborated by so many others.
B.: You should not mix up the dream and the waking
states. Just as you seek corroboration about the waking state
experiences from those whom you see in the waking state,
you must ask for corroboration about the dream experiences
from those whom you saw in the dream state, i.e., when you
were in the dream. Then in the dream, those friends or relations
whom you saw in the dream would corroborate you.
The main point is, are you prepared when awake to affirm
the reality of any of your dream experiences? Similarly, one who
has awakened into jnana cannot affirm the reality of the waking
experience. From his viewpoint, the waking state is dream.
3\n--- 第8页 ---\nV.: It is said only some are chosen for Self-realisation
and those alone could get it. It is rather discouraging.
B.: All that is meant is, we cannot by our own buddhi,
unaided by God’s grace, achieve realisation of Self.
I added, “Bhagavan also says that even that grace does
not come arbitrarily, but because one deserves it by one’s own
efforts either in this or in previous lives.”
V.: Human effort is declared to be useless. What incentive
can any man then have to better himself?
I asked, “Where is it said you should make no effort or
that your effort is useless?”
The visitor thereupon showed the portion in Who am I?
where it is said, “When there is one great Force looking after
all the world, why should we bother what we shall do?” I
pointed out that what is deprecated there is not human effort,
but the feeling that “I am the doer”. Bhagavan approved of
my explanation, when I asked him if it was not so.
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Bhagavan said he once had a dream that he went to Palni
and that he then devoured the Palni God (Lord Subramanya);
and that he had at another time a dream that he visited
Tiruchendur temple (where also the deity is Lord Subramanya).
The details of this dream Bhagavan does not remember.
I remembered that some people once wanted to know if a
jivanmukta can have dreams. The doubt is natural, because we
believe jnanis have no sleep like ordinary men. So they may not
have dreams. I therefore asked Bhagavan about this matter, and
he said, “If the jnani can have a waking state, what is the difficulty
about his having a dream state? But of course as his waking state
is different from the ordinary man’s waking state, so his dream
state also will be different from the ordinary man’s dream state.
Whether in waking or in dream he will not slip from his real
state which is sometimes called the fourth or turiya state.”
4\n--- 第9页 ---\n2222244444-----33333-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
I was reading Vichara Sangraha (Self Enquiry). I came
across the statement that something in the heart Sôu Sôu
Fuß v×¬jÕd ùLôi¥Úd¡\Õ, i.e., something is shining
or sounding as ‘I-I’ in the heart. I have always had doubt what
exactly the word sphurana means. So I asked Bhagavan and
he said, “It means ‘®[eÏYÕ or ®[dÏYÕ’ i.e., which
shines or illuminates.” I asked, “Is it not a sound we hear?”
Bhagavan said, “Yes, we may say it is a sound we feel or
become aware of”. He also referred to the dictionary and said,
“The word means ‘throbbing’, ‘springing on the memory’,
‘flashing across the mind’. Thus both sound and light may be
implied in the word sphurana. Everything has come from light
and sound.”
I asked Bhagavan what it is that ‘shines’, whether it is
the ego or the Self. He said it was neither the one, nor the
other, but something in between the two, that it is something
which is a combination of the ‘I’ (Self) and the ‘I-thought’
(ego), and that the Self is without even this sphurana.
Explaining how the Self is mere light and how it is both
the word or sound and also that out of which word or sound
originally came, Bhagavan said, “Man has three bodies, the
gross one made of the five elements, the sukshma or subtle
one made of manas and prana, and the jiva. Similarly even
Iswara has three bodies. All the manifested universe is His
gross body, light and sound are His sukshma body, and the
Self His jiva.”
2222255555-----33333-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
One P. Sri Krishniah of Peddapalayam, near Tenali,
came to the Asramam on the 22nd and started reading with
Bhagavan’s permission a small work on the life of
Dhanurdasa (©sû[ D\eLô ®p- N¬j§Wm),
5\n--- 第10页 ---\ncomposed by him in Telugu verse and dedicated to
Bhagavan. The dedication is both humorous and touching,
the poem being regarded as a virgin offered to Bhagavan
for marriage, as kanyadana is considered the best gift. He
seems to have written the dedication first and later
composed the work. Thus he chose his son-in-law before
he begot his daughter and in the end of his dedication he
says, “You have already wedded mukti. Please take this
girl of mine also and treat her kindly and well, correcting
her faults and ignoring her weaknesses. I cannot ask you
to go over to our house, though you have become my son-
in-law, as so many Rajahs and others are always coming to
you here for your darshan.” He also says, “By this marriage
of my vaishnava daughter to Bhagavan, advaita and
visishtadvaita have become wedded.”
He read the dedication once again on the 25th afternoon
and also read out his parting or farewell song of which the
following is a free translation: “For men like us, various desires
often occur. Some get fulfilled, others not. Here all my desires
got their satisfaction. One of my desires was to compose a life
of Dhanurdasa in verse, another was to come here in company
with my friends and relations and to offer the hand of my girl
(the poem) to you, a third was to eat to my satisfaction in your
company at the above marriage feast, a fourth was to stay here
a few days and feast my eyes on a sight of you. All these together
I got, by virtue of your grace. Please give me leave to depart.
Oh, one of pure life! What magic have you stored in this form
of yours, that those who have seen it become entranced? What
power have you instilled in this air, that it is able to ward off all
distress? What drug have you mixed in the water of this place
that it is able to subdue all ailments? What powder of
enchantment have you spread over these premises that those
who come here feel reluctant to depart? You alone can know
your greatness. However long we may remain, the feet will not
6\n--- 第11页 ---\nmove to depart from here. What can I do? Please grant me
leave to depart, purushottama (best among men).”
3333311111-----33333-----4444455555
One night, a few days ago, after supper, when Bhagavan
was resting on his cot in the verandah, east of his hall,
something funny took place. He was facing south. Chadwick
was sitting behind Bhagavan’s back. Soon after Bhagavan took
his seat and leaned on the cushions, Chadwick from behind
stealthily and unnoticed fanned Bhagavan. When Bhagavan
turned and looked, Chadwick withdrew the fan and remained
still. When Bhagavan turned his face south, Chadwick resumed
fanning again. Bhagavan turned round and Chadwick stopped.
Bhagavan was left wondering how he got the breeze.
Chadwick then laughed out and Bhagavan joined in the
laughter. This shows how even with such an eminent Master
a devotee can play and both can enjoy the joke like children.
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
It seems a visitor, the Raja of Sivaghar in U.P., told
Bhagavan that he had surrendered himself to Bhagavan and
Bhagavan should give him jnana. Bhagavan referred to an article
on Nama Dev’s insistence on the importance of the Lord’s name,
in the September 1937 issue of Vision, where it is pointed out
that only when the ‘I’, the ego, is surrendered the significance
of the Lord’s name will be realized. When I entered the hall the
story of how Ashtavakra Gita came to be taught was being
recounted in English, for the benefit of the above Raja and other
visitors. After the story was read out, Bhagavan said, “Because
Brahma jnana is not something external, which is somewhere
far away where you can go and get it, you cannot say that it
will take so long or so short a time to attain it. It is always with
you. You are That! The story of Ashtavakra Gita is intended to
teach that for getting Brahma jnana all that is necessary is to
7\n--- 第12页 ---\nsurrender yourself completely to the guru, to surrender your
notion of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. If these are surrendered, what remains
is the Reality. Then, it becomes impossible to state what further
time it would take to attain Brahma jnana. It would be wrong
to state that it takes as much time as a man would require to put
his other foot into the second stirrup after having placed one
foot in the first stirrup. The moment when ego is completely
surrendered, the Self shines.”
Proceeding, Bhagavan quoted the last two lines of the
following stanza from Yoga Vasishta: “Sôù]àm ùTôÚsLô
÷úRôo Oô]Yô LôVe Lô÷o. Sôù]àm ùTôÚ}d
LiúPôo Oô]Yô LôV UôYôo; Sôù]à ULeLôWeLs
Oô]®i U§ûVê¥ öù]m TWU YômT ]uUXo
®¬VôRuú\.” which state that unless the cloud of the ‘I’ or
‘ego-sense’ which covers the moon of the Divine consciousness
(chidakasa) is removed, the lily of the heart which knows nothing
of the sense of ‘I’ (ahankara) will not open out in full bloom.
Bhagavan also added, “We have to contend against age-
long samskaras. They will all go. Only, they go
comparatively soon in the case of those who have already
made sadhana in the past, and late in the case of the others.”
In this connection I asked, “Do these samskaras go gradually
or will they suddenly disappear one day? I ask this, because
though I have remained fairly long here I do not perceive
any gradual change in me.” Bhagavan asked, “When the sun
rises, does the darkness go gradually or all at once?”
Another visitor asked, “How to conquer passions?”
Bhagavan said, “If the passions are something external to us
we can take arms and ammunition and conquer them. They
all come from within us. If, by looking into the source whence
they issue, we see that they don’t come out of us, we shall
conquer them. It is the world and the objects in it that arouse
our passions. But the world and these objects are only created
by our mind. They don’t exist during our sleep.”
8\n--- 第13页 ---\nAfter all this talk Bhagavan drank a little water from his
kamandalam and turning to his attendant enquired whether
he had already drunk some water (i.e., after he returned to the
hall about 3-30 P.M.). The attendant said ‘yes’, and thereupon
Bhagavan said he had forgotten it, and to make sure he drank
some again. He further added, almost in an unguarded
moment, as he rarely gives expression to such experiences of
his, that sometimes he does not even know whether it is
morning, mid-day or evening and has to look at the clock and
try to remember before he knows what time of day it is. On
one occasion, he has told me that he scratched his skin, where
there was eczema once, as we scratch during sleep. And once
when I was concerned over some physical pain of his, he told
me he feels that pain ‘LödLiPôtúTôp’, i.e., it was a
passing and faint experience like that in a dream. These are
clues to the sort of life Bhagavan leads in our midst, seeming
to act and move and feel as we do, but really living in a world
of his own where the things we experience don’t exist.
55555-----66666-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Myself, Harindranath Chattopadhyaya, G.V. Subbaramayya
and T. P. Ramachandra Aiyar were sitting in the front row just
opposite Bhagavan in the hall and G.V.S. said to H.C. “I recently
came across a typed copy of some of your verses made at
Aurobindo Ashram, with Sri Aurobindo’s notes on the margin
highly commending some verses.” Thereupon H.C. told
Bhagavan, “I stayed at Aurobindo’s Ashram for two years and I
then made about 4000 sonnets and a poem of 50,000 lines plus
other poetry.” Apparently the fact that H.C. had been at
Aurobindo’s Ashram before for two years was news to Bhagavan,
though it was not to some of us. This is the third visit of H.C. to
Bhagavan. H.C. then gave us a recitation of two of his earliest
poems and one out of those made at Pondicherry. They are given
below. Bhagavan enjoyed the recitation.
9\n--- 第14页 ---\nTHE EARTHEN GOBLET
(A conversation between the poet and the goblet)
“O silent goblet! red from head to heel,
How did you feel
When you were being twirled
Upon the Potter’s wheel
Before the Potter gave you to the world?”
I felt a conscious impulse in my clay
To break away
From the great Potter’s hand
That burned so warm.
I felt a vast
Feeling of sorrow to be cast
Into my present form.
Before that fatal hour
That saw me captive on the Potter’s wheel
And cast into this crimson goblet-sleep,
I used to feel
The fragrant friendship of a little flower
Whose root was in my bosom buried deep.
The Potter has drawn out the living breath of me,
And given me a form which is the death of me;
My past unshapely natural state was best,
With just one flower flaming through my breast.
PITCHERS OF CLAY
Outside the Potter’s shop upon the way
In patient rows we stand, pitchers of clay —
Under a copper-clouded sky of gold
Expecting every moment to be sold.
Although we have no language, yet we feel
A bitterness towards the Potter’s wheel
10\n--- 第15页 ---\nWhich moulded us, what though without a flaw,
To shape, which is against our being’s law.
Pitchers are beautiful and yet, indeed,
Even from beauty we would all be freed
And, slipping into Earth, secure escape
From the enchanted tyranny of shape.
Some of us pitchers, tired of being, drop
And break to pieces in the Potter’s shop.
Pathetic things! What does the Potter care
For the pale weariness of Earthenware?
SHAPER SHAPED
In days gone by I used to be
A potter who would feel
His fingers mould the yielding clay
To patterns on his wheel;
But now, through wisdom lately won,
That pride has died away,
I have ceased to be the potter
And have learned to be the clay.
In other days I used to be
A poet through whose pen
Innumerable songs would come
To win the hearts of men;
But now, through new-got knowledge
Which I hadn’t had so long,
I have ceased to be the poet
And have learned to be the song.
I was a fashioner of swords,
In days that now are gone,
Which on a hundred battle-fields
Glittered and gleamed and shone;
11\n--- 第16页 ---\nBut now that I am brimming with
The silence of the Lord
I have ceased to be a sword-maker
And learned to be the sword.
In by-gone days I used to be
A dreamer who would hurl
On every side an insolence
Of emerald and pearl.
But now that I am kneeling
At the feet of the Supreme
I have ceased to be the dreamer
And have learned to be the dream.
_____
After this I asked H.C. to recite before Bhagavan (or rather
act as on the stage) a piece from a play of his in which a dock-
labourer groaning under his work bursts out into a complaint.
H.C. did so and all saw how moving a good recitation can be.
After a while H.C. asked Bhagavan, “How is it, Bhagavan, we
sometimes feel choked with tears in Bhagavan’s Presence?”
Bhagavan smiled and kept quiet. I said, “It is a good thing if
one’s tears gush forth like that and even of Bhagavan it is
recorded that when he used to go and stand before the image in
the temple at Madura, before he came here, tears used to flow
involuntarily out of his eyes, not as the result of any joy or pain,
but purely out of bhakti.” Bhagavan was thereupon kind enough
to add, “Even after coming here such a thing has happened.
Even on reading or hearing touching passages from books such
a thing has happened. Apparently a stock of emotional tears is
latent in so many of us, so that at any opportune moment, or on
the slightest provocation, they well out without any control on
our part.” Then Bhagavan narrated, very dramatically as is usual
with him, an incident which occurred when he was about 22
and living in the Virupakshi Cave. It seems he was sitting on a
rock near the cave and a boy of about 8 or 10 years came there,
12\n--- 第17页 ---\nlooked at Bhagavan and, not being able to bear the sight of
such a young and bright person taking to such a hard life of
penance, was so moved to compassion that he started to sob
and sobbed violently for some time. Bhagavan said, “Who could
say what was the reason for his sobbing and why tears flowed
out of him merely at his seeing me?” Bhagavan continued in a
reminiscent mood later in the day and added that another boy,
also about 8 or 10 years old, met Bhagavan another day in his
Virupakshi cave days and took such pity on Bhagavan that the
following conversation took place between them. Bhagavan was
sitting on a rock near the cave, all alone, and the boy came and
met him there.
Boy: Why are you here, all alone, like this?
Bhagavan: I had some trouble at home and so have come
away like this.
Boy: Then how about your food?
Bhagavan: I eat if anybody gives me anything to eat.
Boy: I have a good master. I shall take you to him. First,
you may have to volunteer your services free. If he approves
of your work, he will give you three pies a day and gradually
he will increase it to six pies, and so on.
Bhagavan: Yes, please do so.
Bhagavan added, “There was no doubt that the boy was
very much concerned over what he considered my sad plight
and that he was moved by great and genuine pity.”
Bhagavan also recalled the incident in which an old
Harijan woman, one day about noon time, accosted Bhagavan
on one of his rambles on the rough jungle path down the hill
and remarked, “Du{l TôûP«úX ûYdL! IúW BPj§úX
£Yú] ùVuß BÚdLdáPôRô?”. (“A curse on you! Why
can’t you stay quiet in a place?”)
13\n--- 第18页 ---\nBhagavan said, “Yes, this is very good advice,” and also
slapped his own cheeks, as if in punishment for not having
known what the woman taught then.
Relating the above incident, Bhagavan said that, when
first the old woman began abusing him, he could not
understand how he deserved it and was dumbfounded as to
what offence he could have given to the woman.
This made Mr. T.S. Rajagopal recall an article by one
Miss Souris in a Telugu journal called Bharati. For the benefit
of Harindranath Chattopadhyaya and some others who were
new to it, Bhagavan again related the incident to the merriment
of all of us.
Bhagavan said, “One day the Mauni brought the tapals
(post) as usual. I left the papers and magazines on the couch
and was looking at the letters. After showing the tapals to
me, Mauni left the hall and took the Bharati number with
him, saying he would read it and bring it back. After a little
time he came back, left the magazine on my couch and was
going out. While near the door, he suddenly said, ‘What a
thief is Bhagavan!’ and before I could ask why he said so, he
had gone. I was wondering what I could have done to have
made the Mauni reproach me like that. It sort of rankled in
my mind. And only after I read the article in the Bharati and
came to the very last sentence in it, which was ‘Oh, what a
thief is Bhagavan!’ I could understand the joke.”
2222233333-----88888-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg 1111100000 aaaaa.....mmmmm.....
Mr. Kundanlal Mahatani, of Karachi, who has been
staying here for about eight months, asked Bhagavan for direct
upadesa, urging that all the books emphasise that nothing can
be achieved by anybody except with the help of upadesa from
a guru and that though he has read all the directions given by
Bhagavan for Self-enquiry and attaining stillness of mind
14\n--- 第19页 ---\nwhere God can be realised as ‘I’, he still did not know what
was the best method for him individually. This was not the
first time he had made such a request. At least twice before,
once in June and again in July, he had done so. Neither then
nor now did Bhagavan make any reply. The gentleman was
very much dejected and was worried whether he was not fit
to receive any reply and whether he had committed any offence
on account of which Bhagavan was not pleased to reply.
Later in the day, in the evening, Bhagavan in connection
with some other matter, referred to a Tamil poem, and to look at
a translation of it, Mr. Mahatani borrowed my note book on 24-
8-45. As often happens to devotees, who indirectly receive
necessary instructions, Mr. Mahatani found in the note book
instructions which suited him. Further, on 25-8-45 about 2 p.m.,
when he was having a nap he had a vision in his dream in which
Bhagavan appeared and quoted a Sanskrit sloka and interpreted
it as meaning, ‘There is no better karma or bhakti than enquiry
into the Self’. He was greatly delighted and later in the same
dream another devotee put the same question to Bhagavan and
Mahatani repeated the above answer to him and laughed heartily.
All this was reported to Bhagavan on the 25th by Mahatani.
88888-----99999-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Mr. Subba Rao of Bezwada asked Bhagavan, “What is
the difference between imagination and vision?”
Bhagavan: One is voluntary and the other is not. But in
the ultimate analysis, though not in the immediate present,
even vision must have had its origin in the voluntary sphere.
Subba Rao: As dreams have their origin there?
B: Yes.
Another Visitor: It is said that our waking life is also a
dream, similar to our dream during sleep. But in our dreams
15\n--- 第20页 ---\nwe make no conscious effort to get rid of the dream and to
awake, but the dream itself comes to an end without any
effort on our part and we become awake. Similarly why
should not the waking state, which is in reality only another
sort of dream, come to an end of its own accord, and without
any effort on our part, and land us in jnana or real awakening?
B: Your thinking that you have to make an effort to get rid
of this dream of the waking state and your making efforts to
attain jnana or real awakening are all parts of the dream. When
you attain jnana you will see there was neither the dream during
sleep, nor the waking state, but only yourself and your real state.
I pressed Bhagavan, “But what is the answer to the
question? Why should not the waking state also pass like our
dreams without any effort on our part and land us in jnana, as
a dream passes off and leaves us awake?”
B: Who can say that the dream passed off of its own
accord? If the dream came on, as is generally supposed, as
the result of our past thoughts or karma, probably the same
karma also decides how long it should last and how after that
time it should cease.
I was still unsatisfied and, as the result of further talk with
Bhagavan, I feel that the waking state, though a sort of dream,
is clearly distinct from the dream during sleep in this, namely
that during dream it never occurs to us that it is a dream, whereas
in the waking state we are able to argue and understand from
books and gurus and from some phenomena that it may be
only dream after all. Because of this, it may be our duty to
make an effort to wake into jnana. Bhagavan says that we don’t
deem a dream, a dream till we wake up, that the dream looks
quite real while it lasts; and that similarly this waking state will
not appear a dream till we wake up into jnana. Still, it seems to
me that, because of the above difference between the dream
and the waking states, our effort is called for.
16\n--- 第21页 ---\n1111144444-----99999-----4444455555
Three or four days ago Mr. Desai, Retired Sub-Judge,
asked Bhagavan (with reference to what is said in Ramana
Gita), “How to direct the prana or life-current into the
sushumna nadi, so that as stated in Ramana Gita we could
achieve the severance of the chit-jada granthi?” Bhagavan
said, “By enquiring ‘Who am I?’”
“The yogi may be definitely aiming at rousing the kundalini
and sending it up the sushumna. The jnani may not be having
this as his object. But both achieve the same result, that of sending
the Life-force up the sushumna and severing the chit-jada granthi.
Kundalini is only another name for atma or Self or sakti. We talk
of it as being inside the body, because we conceive ourselves as
limited by this body. But it is in reality both inside and outside,
being no other than Self or the sakti of Self.”
Desai: How to churn up the nadis, so that the kundalini
may go up the sushumna?
Bhagavan: Though the yogi may have his methods of
breath-control, pranayama, mudras, etc., for this object, the
jnani’s method is only that of enquiry. When by this method
the mind is merged in the Self, the Self, its sakti or kundalini,
rises automatically.
The next day a visitor asked Bhagavan, with reference
to the words dhimahi in the gayatri, “What is the idea meant?
I am not able rightly to grasp it.”
B: The words only mean fixing the aham in the Self,
though literally they mean, “We meditate”.
Visitor: I am not able to form a conception of the ‘Tat’ or
the Self. Then, how am I to fix the aham in the Tat.
B: Why should you bother to conceive the Tat which
you don’t know? Try to find out the ‘I’ that you know, what it
is and whence it arises. That is enough.
17\n--- 第22页 ---\n1111166666-----99999-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
A visitor asked, “What should one, who is an absolute
beginner, do in this (i.e., spiritual) line?”
Bhagavan: The very fact that you put this question shows
you know what to do. It is because you feel the want of peace,
that you are anxious to take some steps to secure peace. Because
I have a little pain in my foot, I am applying this ointment.
Visitor: What is the method to be adopted for securing
peace?
B: The conception that there is a goal and a path to it, is
wrong. We are the goal or peace always. To get rid of the
notion that we are not peace is all that is required.
V: All books say that the guidance of a Guru is necessary.
B: The Guru will say only what I am saying now. He will
not give you anything you have not already. It is impossible for
anyone to get what he has not got already. Even if he gets any
such thing, it will go as it came. What comes will also go. What
always is will alone remain. The Guru cannot give you anything
new, which you have not already. Removal of the notion that
we have not realised the Self is all that is required. We are
always the Self. Only, we don’t realise it.
The Asramam compounder asked some questions about
his experiences during meditation. Bhagavan explained that the
Self is the one reality that always exists and it is by its light all
other things are seen. We forget it and concentrate on the
appearances. The light in the hall burns, both when persons are
present there and when they are absent, both when persons are
enacting something as in a theatre and when nothing is being
enacted. It is the light which enabled us to see the hall, the persons
and the acting. We are so engrossed with the objects or
appearances revealed by the light that we pay no attention to the
light. In the waking state or dream state, in which things appear,
and in the sleep state, in which we see nothing, there is always
18\n--- 第23页 ---\nthe light of consciousness or Self, like the hall-lamp always
burning. The thing to do is to concentrate on the seer and not on
the seen, not on the objects, but on the Light which reveals them.
1111188888-----99999-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
A group of Bengalis have come. One of them has recently
lost a child. He put the question to Bhagavan, “Why did that
child die so young? Is it his karma or our karma that we should
have this grief?”
Bhagavan: The prarabdha which the child had to work
out in this life was over and so it passed away. So we may call
it the child’s karma. So far as you are concerned, it is open to
you not to grieve over it, but to remain calm and unaffected
by it, being convinced that the child was not yours but always
only God’s, that God gave and God took away. And in this
connection Bhagavan took out the Yoga Vasishta in English
to refer to the story of Punya and Pavana. Strange to say, when
he casually opened the book, it actually opened at the story
he had in mind. And from the book he asked me to read out
the portion where Punya advises his brother Pavana not to
grieve foolishly over the death of their parents, pointing out
that Pavana had had innumerable births in the past, in each
one of which he had a number of relations and that exactly as
he is not mourning for the death of all those relations now, he
should not now mourn for the death of their father either.
The visitor asked, “When a person dies while yet a child
and another lives long, which of them is the greater sinner?”
B: I cannot say.
I told the visitor that the data he had given could not by
themselves enable anyone to judge which was the greater sinner.
Visitor: If a person lives long, he has greater chances of
perfecting steps to reach realisation.
19\n--- 第24页 ---\nB: The person dying young may soon be reborn and have
in that life better chances of striving towards realisation than
the other person living long in this life.
A visitor asked, “When it is said that we must renounce
all activities, is it meant that we should reduce our activities
as much as possible?”
B: By giving up activities is meant giving up attachment
to activities or the fruits thereof, giving up the notion ‘I am the
doer’. The activities for going through which this body has
come, will have to be gone through. There is no question of
giving up such activities, whatever one may or may not like.
2222277777-----99999-----4444455555
Bhagavan suddenly seems to have felt like visiting
Skandasramam, where for about a week now repairs are being
done; and so without notice to anybody, after the midday meal,
Bhagavan, on his usual after-lunch stroll, wended his way towards
Skandasramam, followed by attendant Rangaswami. Few knew
of this till about 3-30 p.m. But after 3-30 the news gradually
spread and almost all the devotees went up to Skandasramam
and found Bhagavan seated on the terraced platform in front,
which overlooks the temple and town. We found Bhagavan in
very good spirits and relating various events and incidents that
happened during his stay there previous to his coming to
Ramanasramam. Bhagavan had a mind even to continue stopping
there and to spend the night there. But all the devotees had
thronged there and none looked likely to move till Bhagavan
moved. So at about 5-30 p.m. Bhagavan started, looked at the
various parts of the Asramam, telling us where he used to sleep,
where he used to sit, and where mother sat, where they cooked,
where the old tap was, and so on, and then got down by the steps.
On the way he visited Virupakshi Cave and explained about his
life there also. Here he pointed out the UôPjÕl ©s}Vôo
20\n--- 第25页 ---\nUôPm the niche, which is now a small window on the wall facing
east in the verandah in front of the cave. UôPjÕl ©s}Vôo
(i.e., Ganesa in the niche) is an expression occurring in two
stanzas, one composed by Iswara Swami and another composed
by Bhagavan in praise of a Ganesa image placed in that niche at
the time Bhagavan was staying in Virupakshi Cave. Some
sannyasi who seems to have been living in that cave for some
days now brought water from the well nearby and Bhagavan
drank it with pleasure. Then Bhagavan left the cave for
Ramanasramam, slowly wending his way down the steps. At the
foot we all sat with him under a pipal tree around which there is
a platform, close to Guha Namasivaya’s Cave. Satakopa Naidu
of Bangalore brought some ùTô¬ (puffed rice) and groundnuts.
All the crowd sat there with Bhagavan and enjoyed this picnic.
By this time it was getting dark, and we all started along the hill
track leading to the town through Guha Namasivaya’s Cave and
along the main road, and reached the Asramam about 8-30 p.m.
It was a marvel that Bhagavan did this trip all on foot in
this way, the more so because his left big toe had become
either dislocated or badly sprained on 26-8-45, and as a result
thereof is still having some pain there.
Since Bhagavan left Skandasramam, he had gone there
two or three times within about a year or two after his settling
down here. But after that, i.e., for nearly twenty-two years
now, he has never gone there till today. Bhagavan was in great
spirits and all the way down from Skandasramam to
Ramanasramam he stopped once every few yards and related
various incidents and made remarks about some trees having
disappeared in the interval and about some cracks in the
Virupakshi Cave, about the place where Jadaswami rolled
stones down on Bhagavan (though Bhagavan would have it,
it was all only in fun), and about the heavy rain and storm that
came on one night and displaced huge boulders and created a
spring for the convenience of Bhagavan and his followers.
21\n--- 第26页 ---\n66666-----1111100000-----4444455555
It was reported to Bhagavan that somehow under cover of
the leaves, two mangoes had escaped the notice of the monkeys
and had grown to quite a big size and that they were discovered
today, and that one was taken away by the monkeys and the other
left behind. This made Bhagavan think of the expression ‘B~
Uû\Ü’ (under cover of leaves) and by association of ideas he
thought of a stanza in ‘©W×-eL Ä~’ (Prabhulinga Lila), the
9th in ‘UÚ[ NeLW úRYo L§’ and read out to us a few stanzas,
where it is related that once Marula Sankara was living like a
madman near the place where leaf-plates, after eating, were thrown
away in front of a mutt. Neither the head of the mutt nor the disciples
knew anything about this man. But when Allama Prabhu went
that way, Marula got up and prostrated himself at his feet and
Allama Prabhu in turn took him up and embraced him. For, each
knew the other’s worth. Only a jnani can recognise a jnani. One
who indulges in kriya, charya, or yoga can be recognised by these
activities which he goes through. But in the case of a jnani there is
no such external thing by which we can recognise him.
I note this incident, the more particularly because some
who come here also sometimes have found it difficult to
recognise Bhagavan’s worth and have even asked me, “What is
there about this Bhagavan of yours which makes you think he
is a great man or a realised soul? He eats and sleeps and does
everything else like us.”
88888-----1111100000-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Janaki, daughter of Mr. A. Subbarayadu, the Deputy
Superintendent of Police of this place, asked Bhagavan, “I
want to do nama smarana always. But I am also keen on
getting higher education. (She is in the first year College
class). What should I do?”.
Bhagavan: There is nothing contradictory between the
two desires.
22\n--- 第27页 ---\nJanaki: If I am always doing nama smarana, how can I
carry on studies for which the mind is required?
Bhagavan did not answer. But Frydman and I told the girl,
“It was said both could be done at the same time.” Frydman
added, “Give the mind to studies and the heart to God.”
99999-----1111100000-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Mr. K. Mahatani asked in continuation of the above, “If
we want to succeed in any enterprise in the world, we must
give our whole mind and heart to it. Otherwise we cannot
succeed. So it is rather impracticable to devote one’s mind
both to God and worldly activity.”
Bhagavan: If one keeps fixed in the Self, the activities
will still go on and their success will not be affected. One should
not have the idea that one is the doer. The activities will still go
on. That force, by whatever name you may call it, which brought
the body into existence will see to it that the activities which
this body is meant to go through are brought about.
Mr. Mahatani was still not quite satisfied and thereupon
Bhagavan referred him to read an article on renunciation which
is found at the end of the Gita Press edition of Bhagavad Gita.
This article mentions seven stages of renunciation and
Bhagavan said, “Let Mr. Mahatani see if anything in this article
appeals to him”. I read out the whole article in the hall for the
benefit of all, as Bhagavan desired. It is said there that one
who has reached the seventh stage of renunciation will not
feel even when his body is cut by a weapon or some other
suffering is inflicted on him. When this portion was being
read Bhagavan remembered the following poem.
YgNLo úYpùLôÓ Uôo© ù]±«à
ùUgN úYRZu ê¥ ùV¬«à
Sg£ öWZ öL S-«à
Ug£ PôWÕ Yô]kR UôYúR.
23\n--- 第28页 ---\n(i.e., They won’t be afraid even if guileful enemies stab
their chest or they are surrounded by fire or bitten by a cobra,
all will be bliss for them). This is found in Ponnambala Swami’s
commentary on Bhagavad Gita in Tamil stanzas, Chapter VI
Verse 17 (Page 150 of the Asramam book). Continuing this
topic, I said, “It is true such things are said in the books. But we
see that the jnani feels pain. Even one like Sri Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa felt pain when he had cancer of the throat and
cried out, ‘Why has mother sent this pain to me?’”
Bhagavan: It may be like that in the beginning, due to
long association or habit. But afterwards it will pass off.
In this connection I must record that long ago, once when
Bhagavan was suffering from some illness and I expressed
concern, Bhagavan was pleased to explain to me that he felt
the pain as in a dream and no more.
1111100000-----1111100000-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
I came across the following on pages 110 and 111 in
Letters to my friends by Gilbert Henry Gedge in the September
1945 issue of Science of Thought Review.
“Again, people sometimes say that when they are at work
there is no time to be thinking about God; their mind has to
be ‘on the job’.
“Now, friend, I say to you once again that for all these different
matters the remedy is the same. Seek first the kingdom of God.
When that is done all things fall into their proper place and their
proper perspective in our mind. God is in you and in all your
circumstances now, and you and your own individual little world
are in God now. Realisation of that fact involves also the realisation
that all things in your life are in their right place and order, that the
law of God rules your whole life and circumstances. Nothing
whatever can be excluded from the rule of that law when we realise
that our life is actually lived in God. Even when we are engaged in
24\n--- 第29页 ---\nour daily work it helps to think of God, to recognise His presence
with us, within and around us and in our job. It helps even more
to see the job as God’s work, for when we do so, we find new
and better ways of doing it and are blessed in the doing.”
I read this out to Bhagavan and he approved of it and
even asked me to show it to Mr. Mahatani as bearing on last
evening’s discourse.
1111111111-----1111100000-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Mr. G.V. Subbaramayya arrived. Just then Bhagavan was
reading a Telugu translation of his preface to Dakshinamurti
Stotra in Tamil. A few days ago Mr. P.C. Desai brought to
Bhagavan’s notice a Gujarati book on Dakshinamurti Stotra,
written by himself. And in connection with it Bhagavan asked
me to make for Mr. P.C. Desai’s benefit an English translation
of Bhagavan’s Tamil preface to the Stotra. This led Smt.
Nagamma to make a Telugu translation. Reading and explaining
the above Telugu translation, Bhagavan told Mr. G.V.
Subbaramayya practically all that he had told Mr. P.C. Desai
before. The gist of it is this: “Dakshinamurti, i.e., the great Siva
himself could not express the truth of the one Reality except by
silence. But that silence could not be understood except by the
very advanced. The others have to be told. And yet how is one
to say in words that which God himself could not express?
Sankara therefore advises the method of praising Dakshinamurti
and with that as the ostensible object really seeks to explain
that all is Brahman. In the first four stanzas he explains the
nature of the world, since what prevents our knowing the reality
is the world and if its (i.e., world’s) nature is understood, the
obstacle in the way of realising truth will be removed. In the
next four stanzas he explains the nature of the jiva. Then he
explains the connection between the two and teaches that all is
Self. Trying to explain the scheme and gist of Sankara’s
Dakshinamurti Stotra, I wrote the above brief preface.”
25\n--- 第30页 ---\n1111188888-----1111100000-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
A visitor from the Punjab asked Bhagavan, “When I
meditate I feel a certain bliss at times. On such occasions,
should I ask myself ‘Who is it that experiences this bliss’?”
Bhagavan: If it is the real bliss of the Self that is
experienced, i.e., if the mind has merged really in the Self,
such a doubt will not arise at all. The question itself shows
real bliss was not reached.
All doubts will cease only when the doubter and his source
have been found. There is no use removing doubts. If we clear
one doubt, another doubt will arise and there will be no end of
doubts. But if the doubter is found to be really non-existent, by
seeking for the source of the doubter, then all doubts will cease.
Visitor: Sometimes I hear internal sounds. What should
I do when such things happen?
Bhagavan: Whatever may happen, keep up the enquiry
into the Self, asking ‘Who hears these sounds?’ till the reality
is reached.
A second edition of Sri Ramana, the Sage of Arunagiri by
Aksharajna has recently come out. Sampling it here and there, I
came across the passage that Bhagavan blesses his disciples in
various ways, the mild by sight, the middling by thought and the
advanced by touch. Once when I was reading Kaivalyam in Tamil
I asked Bhagavan, “Many books speak of Gurus blessing disciples
or giving diksha by touching the head of the disciple with their
hands or feet. How is it then Bhagavan never does any such
thing?” Bhagavan then told me, “It is true the books mention the
three ways of diksha, viz., by sight, touch and thought. But diksha
by thought is really the best.” So I asked Bhagavan today about
the above passage in Aksharajna’s book, saying, “He also knew
Bhagavan well. He must have had some reason for saying so.”
Bhagavan said, “I don’t know,” and added, “I might have touched
some by accident or for other reasons, not with the intention of
26\n--- 第31页 ---\ngiving diksha.” In this connection, I may record on the authority
of Mr. G.V. Subbaramayya (who was present when the incident
occurred) that some years ago, an old, venerable and
distinguished-looking ascetic from North India was staying in
the Asramam for about a month, that he used to repeat the entire
Bhagavad Gita and that on the day of his departure Bhagavan
touched him in the following circumstances:
Bhagavan returned to the hall after his morning stroll and
sat on the couch. While his feet were still touching the ground,
the above ascetic fell at Bhagavan’s feet, his head almost touching
Bhagavan’s feet and prayed that Bhagavan should bless him with
diksha by touch, adding he would not get up till Bhagavan did
so. Bhagavan thereupon was pleased to put one of his hands on
the old man’s head and lifted him with the other hand.
While all this talk was going on, Dr. Srinivasa Rao was
massaging Bhagavan’s feet which had some rheumatic trouble.
Bhagavan humorously remarked, “Doctor is now giving diksha
to me by touch.” About 15 days ago, when the Doctor was
massaging Bhagavan’s feet, Bhagavan asked him to stop,
saying, “What you have done is enough. You may go and sit
down. I shall do some massaging myself and get some punya.
Why should you alone have all the punya?” and began
massaging himself. (punya is spiritual merit earned, for
example, by service to a Master).
1111199999-----1111100000-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
A barrister from Bombay asked Bhagavan, “I have read
the works of Bhagavan and others and, though I can understand
them intellectually, I have not been able to realise anything in
experience. I have tried Bhagavan’s method for about six years
and yet I have not made any progress. When I meditate, other
thoughts come. For people like me, living in cities and doing
our work and coming here only occasionally, what sadhana
27\n--- 第32页 ---\nwould Bhagavan advise so that we may succeed better than I
have so far been able to do?”
Bhagavan: Your real nature is always there, your
meditation, etc., come only temporarily. Reality being your
Self, there is nothing for you to realise. All that is required
is that you should give up regarding the unreal as real,
which is what all are doing. The object of all meditation,
dhyana or japa is only that, to give up all thoughts regarding
the not-self, to give up many thoughts and to keep to the
one thought.
As for sadhana, there are many methods. You may do
vichara, asking yourself ‘Who am I?’ or, if that does not appeal
to you, you may do dhyana ‘I am Brahman’ or otherwise, or
you may concentrate on a mantra or name in japa. The object is
to make the mind one-pointed, to concentrate it on one thought
and thus exclude our many thoughts, and if we do this, eventually
even the one thought will go and the mind will get extinguished
in its source.
Visitor: In actual practice I find I am not able to succeed
in my efforts. Unless Bhagavan’s grace descends on me I
cannot succeed.
Bhagavan: Guru’s grace is always there. You imagine it
is something, somewhere high up in the sky, far away, and
has to descend. It is really inside you, in your heart, and the
moment (by any of the methods) you effect subsidence or
merger of the mind into its source, the grace rushes forth,
spouting as from a spring, from within you.
Another visitor asked, “What is the reality of this world?”
Bhagavan: If you know your reality first, you will be
able to know the reality of the world. It is a strange thing
that most people do not care to know about their own reality,
but are very anxious to know about the reality of the world.
28\n--- 第33页 ---\nYou realise your own Self first and then see if the world
exists independently of you and is able to come and assert
before you its reality or existence.
Another visitor asked, “Why is there so much pain even
for the innocent, such as children for instance? How is it to be
explained? With reference to previous births or otherwise?”
Bhagavan: As about the world, if you know your own
reality, these questions won’t arise. All these differences, the
pains and miseries of the innocent, as you say, do they exist
independently of you? It is you that see these things and ask
about them. If by the enquiry ‘Who am I’? you understand
the seer, all problems about the seen will be completely solved.
Dr. Syed asked, “If a person prays for a spiritual good for
say two years and yet is not answered, what should he do?”
Bhagavan: It may be it is for his good that the prayer is
not granted.
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Bhagavan related the following: “When my uncle Nelliappa
Aiyar came to see me I was in the Mango tope (grove) near
Gurumoortham. The direct and shortest route to that place from
the Railway station lay through a place where a Swami
(UôUWjÕfNôª) was living. My uncle, meeting that Swami,
and in his anxiety (because I had come away directly from my
schoolboy life and so could hardly know anything about religion
or spiritual truths), enquired of the above Swami whether I really
knew anything in the path on which I had entered. The Swami
told my uncle that I knew nothing, but was sitting with eyes
closed in a firm and obstinate manner, doing some sort of hatha
yoga. So my uncle, who had a notion that none could know
anything of value in spiritual life without reading Vedanta sastras,
had a very poor opinion of me and felt only pity for me. Later,
when I was in Virupakshi Cave, one day I was explaining the
fourth stanza in Dakshinamurti Stotra to a young man who used
29\n--- 第34页 ---\nto come to me frequently and who had requested me to explain
the Stotra. In those days I was still generally silent and people
thought I was observing mauna. My uncle suddenly appeared
on the scene and I was caught in the act of explaining the Stotra.
I was taken aback and for a moment hesitated whether I should
continue the talk or observe mauna. But, seeing my uncle had
already learnt that I did not mind talking, I continued the discourse.
This convinced my uncle that I knew a great deal which he thought
I could not have known.” Bhagavan added, “The Swami who
informed my uncle first that I knew nothing had also to change
his opinion. This is how it happened. One day, returning from
my pradakshina round the hill, I entered the Easanya Mutt and
there I found this Swami. He showed the Vivekachudamani and
asked me about some stanza there. When I explained it, quoting
other portions from the same book and also other books, he
completely changed his estimate of me.”
I may also record here, since it does not seem to have
been recorded so far, that Bhagavan told us that when his
uncle came and had to send a written message to Bhagavan
before he could get admittance, the poor gentleman had no
ink or pen and wrote his message on a piece of paper with
some twig for pen and the juice of prickly-pear fruit for ink.
2222266666-----1111100000-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Bhagavan told me that one morning, when he was
sitting on the verandah in Virupakshi Cave, the words
LÚ|VôùXu{ VôiP ¿ came to him very insistently, but
he took no special notice of them. It seems the same thing
happened the following morning also. Then Bhagavan composed
the first stanza of ‘@Ú÷NX T§Lm’ (Eleven Verses on
Arunachala). The next morning the words beginning the second
stanza similarly came to him and he composed the second stanza;
and so it went on every day, until the last two stanzas were
composed on one day. On that day, after composing the two last
30\n--- 第35页 ---\nstanzas Bhagavan, it seems, started for giripradakshina (going
round the hill). One of his disciples, Aiyaswami, brought a piece
of paper and pencil and told another disciple who was going
with Bhagavan, “Bhagavan has been composing one stanza every
morning for some days now, and today he has composed two
stanzas. More may come to him today. In case they do, have this
paper and pencil with you, so that the same may be recorded.”
And on the way round the hill Bhagavan actually composed the
first six stanzas of the Arunachala Ashtakam (Eight Verses on
Arunachala). It seems Echamma first got the ‘@bW UQUô~’
(The Marital Garland of Letters) published and later Narayana
Reddi. This Narayana Reddi came to know of the Padhikam and
Ashtakam soon afterwards, and wanted to publish them. Then
Bhagavan composed two more stanzas for completing the
Ashtakam; and the Padhikam and Ashtakam were published by
Narayana Reddi. This is how the Padhikam and Ashtakam in the
Five Hymns on Arunachala came to be composed.
I asked Bhagavan: “I know that in the Madura house itself,
Bhagavan had the dawn of jnana and that ever since then,
Bhagavan had no ‘úRLôjU ×j§’ (I-am-this-body
consciousness). I know also that Bhagavan had a ‘RôTm’ (a
burning sensation) in the body which did not cease until he arrived
at the temple here and reported His arrival to God Arunachala.
But I don’t believe this was the ‘¨uù]¬’ mentioned in Marital
Garland; I also think that Bhagavan has gone through the severe
pain or physical ordeal which I have read most Saints had to go
through when the knot between body and spirit is sundered. I
wish to know when this happened in Bhagavan’s life. I know
this information is not needed for my improvement. But for
Bhagavan’s history I think it is necessary.”
Bhagavan kept quiet and only smiled. But after a time,
he said the Marital Garland was written about 1914-1915.
By that Bhagavan apparently meant to tell me that the knot
was sundered long before that, about 1896 itself.
31\n--- 第36页 ---\nAAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
For some days now Bhagavan’s rheumatic troubles have
been pretty bad and so his legs are being occasionally
massaged with some medicated oils. For about ten days now
there has been in the town some Swami who professes to be
able to cure with his vibhuti all kinds of diseases; and people
from various villages have been flocking to see him and most
of them also peep in at the Asramam to see Bhagavan. So
Bhagavan said, “If all these people come and see I have all
these physical ills myself and need to be massaged with
medicated oils, they will know I am no good and won’t come
anymore. So this massaging is good in one way.”
2222299999-----1111100000-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Dilip Kumar Roy, singer and author, who is on a visit
here from Sri Aurobindo Ashram, asked Bhagavan, “According
to the Maha Yoga you say that the sages have not said anything
to contradict each other. Yet, we find one advocating bhakti,
another jnana, etc., leading thus to all sorts of quarrels.”
Bhagavan: There is really nothing contradictory in such
teachings. When for instance a follower of bhakti marga
declares that bhakti is the best, he really means by the word
bhakti what the jnana marga man calls jnana. There is no
difference in the state or its description by attributes or
transcendence of attributes. Only different thinkers have used
different words. All these different margas, or paths or
sadhanas lead to the same goal. What is once a means becomes
itself the goal. When that happens dhyana, bhakti or jnana,
which was at one time a conscious and painful effort, becomes
the normal and natural state, spontaneously and without effort.
3333300000-----1111100000-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Dilip Kumar Roy read out a poem in English composed
by him on Bhagavan and sang some songs before Bhagavan.
32\n--- 第37页 ---\nLater he asked Bhagavan, “While all say Guru’s direction is
necessary it seems Bhagavan has said a Guru is not necessary.”
Bhagavan: I have not said so. But a Guru need not always
be in human form. First a person thinks he is an inferior and
that there is a superior, all-knowing and all-powerful God who
controls his own and the world’s destiny, and worships him
or does bhakti. When he reaches a certain stage and becomes
fit for enlightenment, the same God whom he was worshipping
comes as Guru and leads him on. That Guru comes only to
tell him. ‘The God is within yourself. Dive within and realise.’
God, Guru and the Self are the same.
Roy: But in Bhagavan’s case there was no Guru.
Bhagavan: The whole world was my Guru. It has been
already said that Guru need not be in human form and that
the Self within, God and Guru are the same.
Roy: I once asked my Gurudev (i.e., Sri Aurobindo) about
this and he said, ‘A spiritual Hercules like Bhagavan needs
no Guru’.
Bhagavan: Everything in the world was my Guru. Don’t
you know that Dattatreya, when he was asked by the king which
Guru had taught him the secret of bliss, replied that the earth,
water, fire, animals, men etc., all were his Gurus and went on
explaining how some of these taught him to cling to what was
good and others taught him what things he should avoid as bad.
3333311111-----1111100000-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Chella Battar (Daivasikamani Battar), temple priest of
Tiruchuzhi, has come. Bhagavan pointed him out to me and
said, “Whenever I see him I am reminded of the cut I received
on my left finger and the scar it has left. I was about eight years
old and he about three. His house was third from ours. Before
his birth and when I was a child I used to be frequently taken to
33\n--- 第38页 ---\ntheir house and petted as almost their child. It was Pongal time
and this child came to our house with one hand holding a new
‘@±Yôi U|’ (blade fastened to a piece of wood for slicing
vegetables), and the other hand dragging a long stout sugar
cane. I hastened to cut the sugar cane for the child and
accidentally got a cut between my thumb and left forefinger. I
quietly asked the child to go back to his house and ran to the
hospital and got my wound treated. It is this gentleman’s son
that was here sometime back, called Karpurasundaram, who is
now doing puja in ‘Sundara Mandiram’ at Tiruchuzhi.”
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Ganapati Sastri brought a letter received by him from
Grant Duff, who was here some years ago and is a great
devotee of Bhagavan. In that letter Grant Duff says he is in
California with the permission of the U.S.A. Government,
that the country is pleasant, that he is nearing eighty, that he
is anxious to make the best use of the very little time he may
yet have in the world and that he hopes by Bhagavan’s grace
to visit the Asramam again, travelling by air.
Bhagavan drew my attention to Colombo Ramachandra’s
speech delivered at Colombo on the occasion of the Golden
Jubilee of Vivekananda’s speech at the Chicago Conference and
printed in the Ramakrishna Vijayam of the Tamil month Aippasi.
In it, Ramachandra says, “Vivekananda on his return from
America said in his speeches that South India was going to take
a leading part in the spiritual regeneration of the world, that in
the 20th century there was going to rise in South India a flood of
atmic power which would inundate not only the whole of India
but the entire world. That force is what is now being generated
and radiated by Aurobindo and Bhagavan in South India.”
Bhagavan was reading an English translation of a French
letter received from one Zikovsky and family, of
34\n--- 第39页 ---\nCzechoslovakia, to this effect: “I and my family are grateful
to Bhagavan for all his blessings so far. I hope to go and see
Bhagavan, God willing. Meanwhile I pray Bhagavan may send
such instructions or directions as he may deem fit.” Bhagavan
is not able to recognise the writer, but says he must be one of
those who wrote from Europe (about the time Brunton first
wrote about Bhagavan), that they knew long ago, i.e., long
before Brunton’s writing about Bhagavan and his teaching
and that they had been practising what Bhagavan taught.
Bhagavan thinks the writer of the letter must be one of those
who read about him and his teachings from what appeared
from the pen of Humphreys (who became a devotee of
Bhagavan about 1910-11) in some journals at that time.
22222-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Dilip Kumar Roy read out another poem composed by
him on Bhagavan. Then he sang a few songs. Then he asked
Bhagavan, “What is the best way of killing the ego?”
Bhagavan: To each person that way is the best which
appears easiest or appeals most. All the ways are equally good,
as they lead to the same goal, which is the merging of the ego
in the Self. What the bhakta calls surrender, the man who does
vichara calls jnana. Both are trying only to take the ego back
to the source from which it sprang and make it merge there.
Roy: But which is the best way for me? Bhagavan must
know.
Bhagavan did not reply. (This is only usual with
Bhagavan. He leaves it to each devotee to find out what
sadhana appears most easy to him).
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Mr. Roy again sang a few songs. At the end he asked
Bhagavan, “Music also helps one to develop bhakti, does it not?”
35\n--- 第40页 ---\nBhagavan: Yes. Yes.
When Roy was taking leave, he asked Bhagavan whether
bhakti marga could be followed with advantage and whether
it would lead to jnana.
Bhagavan: Yes. Yes. Bhakti is jnana mata i.e., the
mother of jnana.
66666-----1111111111-----4444455555 EEEEEvvvvveeeeennnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
An elderly gentleman and a young man were sitting in
front of Bhagavan. A little before Bhagavan was about to start
for his evening stroll, the young man approached Bhagavan
and said that his companion had lost his eyesight. Bhagavan
nodded, as usual. Soon after, Bhagavan got up and told us,
“He says he has lost his eyes. I have lost my legs. He comes
and tells me. To whom am I to go and complain!” For nearly
a month or more Bhagavan has been having more than usual
trouble with his legs, either due to rheumatism or deficiency
of B Vitamin. But how serious it is may be realised from his
saying he has ‘lost his legs’. This is not the first time he has
said, “All of you come and complain to me. To whom am I to
go and complain?” This is quite consistent with his teaching,
that there is nothing but the Self and that he is That!
88888-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
When (on 2-11-45) Mr. Roy asked Bhagavan the best way
of killing the ego, Bhagavan said, “To ask the mind to kill the
mind is like making the thief the policeman. He will go with you
and pretend to catch the thief, but nothing will be gained. So you
must turn inward and see where the mind rises from and then it
will cease to exist.” In reference to this answer, Mr. Thambi Thorai
of Jaffna (who has been living in Palakothu for over a year) asked
me, whether asking the mind to turn inward and seek its source
is not also employing the mind. So, I put this doubt before
36\n--- 第41页 ---\nBhagavan and Bhagavan said, “Of course we are employing the
mind. It is well known and admitted that only with the help of
the mind the mind has to be killed. But instead of setting about
saying there is a mind, and I want to kill it, you begin to seek the
source of the mind, and you find the mind does not exist at all.
The mind, turned outwards, results in thoughts and objects.
Turned inwards, it becomes itself the Self. Such a mind is
sometimes called arupa manas or suddha manas.”
Today, the doorway on the south facing Bhagavan’s seat
has been closed and a window constructed in its place; and
the middle window on the northern wall has been replaced by
the doorway removed from the southern wall. Going through
this doorway, Bhagavan need not climb any steps.
1111111111-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Maha Vir Prasad, Chief Engineer, U.P., who has been
staying here for about twenty days, asked Bhagavan, “I find
it said in Maha Yoga that in the beginning of meditation one
may attend to the breath, i.e.. its inspiration and expiration,
and that after a certain amount of stillness of the mind is
thereby attained, one can dive into the heart seeking the
source of the mind. I have been badly in want of some such
practical hint. Can I follow this method? Is it correct?”
Bhagavan: The thing is to kill the mind somehow. Those
who have not the strength to follow the enquiry method are
advised pranayama as a help to control the mind. And
pranayama is of two kinds, one of controlling and regulating
the breath and the other of simply watching the breath.
Prasad: During meditation I sometimes attain a state
lasting for about fifteen minutes, during which I am not aware
of anything and am free from all thoughts. Some have told
me that such a state is what may be called yoga nidra and
that one should guard against such a state as bad.
37\n--- 第42页 ---\nBhagavan: One should endeavour to get beyond sleep.
(For some reason Bhagavan did not answer further the query
put by Prasad). I thereupon advised Prasad to read Crumbs
from the Table, where this particular matter is dealt with.
Bhagavan also asked us to take a copy of the book and give
it to Prasad. We did so.
EEEEEvvvvveeeeennnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
A visitor: I don’t know what kundalini is.
Bhagavan: Kundalini is one name given by the yogic
people for what may be called the atma sakti inside the body.
The vichara school calls the same power jnana. The bhakta
calls it love or bhakti. The yogic school says that this power
is dormant in muladhara at the base of the spinal cord and
that it must be roused and taken through the various chakras
on to sahasrara at the top, in the brain, to attain moksha. The
jnanis think this power is centred in the heart, and so on.
1111122222-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
A visitor from the Punjab asked Bhagavan, “When the
mind or ahankar is killed, is that stage an inert stage?”
Bhagavan: Why do you bother about the jnani’s state?
You understand your present state.
Visitor: The mumukshu naturally wants to know about
the mukti state which is his goal.
Bhagavan kept quiet for a little while and then said, “You
admit mind has to be killed. Why don’t you do it first and see
for yourself then whether that stage is inert or without
consciousness?”
Visitor: When ahankar goes, will aham vritti exist?
Bhagavan: That which is, always is. If the ahankar dies,
It, the Reality, exists as It has always existed. You may speak
38\n--- 第43页 ---\nof It as having aham vritti or simply aham. It is all the same.
That which exists is ‘I am’ or ‘aham’.
1111188888.....1111111111.....4444455555
This morning about 6 a.m. Vaikunta Vasar, an attendant,
was massaging Bhagavan’s legs. After he had been massaging
for about half an hour, Bhagavan expressed ‘Fu]jûRúVô
©¥d¡øl úTô-Úd¡\Õ’ (I vaguely feel that something is
being massaged). This is perhaps a glimpse into the inner life
of Bhagavan. He was not in any trance or special samadhi
then, but in his usual state.
2222200000-----1111111111-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
One Rishikesananda Swami of the Ramakrishna Mission
is here. It seems he has been advised by Swami Siddheswarananda
to visit Bhagavan. Bhagavan spoke about Siddheswarananda and
showed two books, one containing his lectures (causeries) and
another which was received only three weeks back though
despatched from France in 1941. Rishikesananda said that
Siddheswarananda had learnt French very well and spoke fluently
in that language. He also said that one Vijayananda Swami was
working in South America and was very popular there in spite of
hostile propaganda by Christian missionaries. Two ladies of
affluence supported the Swami and asked him to remain there.
One of the ladies was Mrs. Guirellis, (known to the Asramam as
Mamita, who had adopted the Canarese boy Raman and who is
staying at Bangalore now near the Ramakrishna Mission).
Siddheswarananda intends to come to India for a few months
and hopes to visit Ramanasramam also then. The talk drifted to
the clothes these Swamis wear in foreign countries.
Rishikesananda told Bhagavan that generally they wear European
clothes and that, while delivering lectures, they wear long and
flowing ochre-coloured robes and a turban such as Vivekananda
is seen wearing in some pictures.
39\n--- 第44页 ---\n2222211111-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
The Swami was asking Bhagavan about the characteristics
of a jnani. Bhagavan said they are all described in books, such as
the Bhagavad Gita, but that we must bear in mind that the jnani’s
state being one which transcends the mind cannot be described
with the help merely of the mind and that all description therefore
must be defective. Only silence can correctly describe their state
or characteristics. But silence is more effective than speech. From
silence came thought, from thought the ego and from the ego
speech. So if speech is effective, how much more effective must
its original source be? In this connection Bhagavan related the
following story: “Tattvaraya composed a bharani (a kind of poetic
composition in Tamil) in honour of his Guru Swarupananda and
convened an assembly of learned pandits to hear the work and
assess its value. The pandits raised the objection that a bharani
was only composed in honour of great heroes capable of killing
a thousand elephants, and that it was not in order to compose
such a work in honour of an ascetic. Thereupon the author said,
‘Let us all go to my Guru and we shall have this matter settled
there’. They went to the Guru and, after all had taken their seats,
the author told his Guru the purpose of their coming there. The
Guru sat silent and all the others also remained in mauna. The
whole day passed, night came, and some more days and nights,
and yet all sat there silently, no thought at all occurring to any of
them and nobody thinking or asking why they had come there.
After three or four days like this, the Guru moved his mind a bit,
and thereupon the assembly regained their thought activity. They
then declared, “Conquering a thousand elephants is nothing beside
this Guru’s power to conquer the rutting elephants of all our egos
put together. So certainly he deserves the bharani in his honour!”
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
A lady visitor from Sri Aurobindo’s Ashram asked
Bhagavan, “When I concentrate, all sorts of thoughts rise and
40\n--- 第45页 ---\ndisturb me. The more I try, the more thoughts rise up. What
should I do?”
Bhagavan: Yes. It will be so. All that is inside will try to
come out. There is no other way except to pull up the mind
each time it wants to go astray and to fix it on the Self.
Bhagavan quoted the verse in the Bhagavad Gita which says
that as often as the wavering mind goes after anything, it should
be drawn away and fixed in the Self.
Siva Mohan Lal asked Bhagavan, “When I concentrate
here in Bhagavan’s presence, I am able to fix my thought on
the Self easily. But in my place it takes a long time and
much trouble to do so. Now why should it be so, especially
as I feel convinced that Bhagavan is everywhere and is my
antaryami?” I said, “It must of course be so. Though we are
told that God is immanent everywhere, are we not also told
that he is more manifest in some objects or places than in
others, e.g., in temples, and images or avatars?” Bhagavan
said, “Ask Muruganar, who is here. He has sung a song where
he says Ramanasramam is not simply here for him, but
everywhere.” Thereupon Muruganar read out the following
stanza from ‘WUQ úRYUô~’ (Ramana Devamalai):
AiùP]úY VôiÓ UPe¡U] ¨t\Xôp
CiÓ×]p ãÝXL ùUeLÔúU#úYi¥
@UWo TXÚ UûPÙm ùT¬V
WUQúR Yôf£ WUm.
Which means, ‘Because (by His grace) the mind has attained
quiescence and remains calm everywhere as it used to remain
at Ramanasramam, wherever I may go in this world it is to me
Ramanasramam, to which even devas go with keen desire.’ In
other words, Ramanasramam is chid akasa which is everywhere
and to which we gain access by killing the mind. Bhagavan
added, “Time and place really do not exist. Even in the radio
we have a hint of this truth. We have Hyderabad here. What is
41\n--- 第46页 ---\nsung there, we hear here at the same time as it is sung there.
Where is time and place?”
Dr. Srinivasa Rao asked Bhagavan, “What is the meaning
of ‘çeLôUp çeÏYÕ’, i.e., being in sleepless sleep?”
Bhagavan: It is the jnani’s state. In sleep our ego is
submerged and the sense organs are not active. The jnani’s
ego has been killed and he does not indulge in any sense
activities of his own accord or with the notion that he is the
doer. So he is in sleep. At the same time he is not unconscious
as in sleep, but fully awake in the Self; so his state is
sleepless. This sleepless sleep, wakeful sleep, or whatever
it may be called, is the turiya state of the Self, on which as
the screen, all the three avasthas, the waking, dream and
sleep, pass, leaving the screen unaffected.” Bhagavan said
that instead of holding on to that which exists, we are looking
for that which does not. We bother about the past and the
future, not realising the truth of the present. We do not know
the ‘A§’ (beginning) or the ‘@kRm’ (end). But we know
the middle. If we find out the truth of this, we shall know
the beginning and the end. Bhagavan quoted from Bhagavad
Gita: “I am in the heart of all beings and am their beginning,
middle and end.” Bhagavan also said the reality is only
mauna and quoted Thayumanavar:
úYßTÓe NUVùUpXôm ×ÏkÕ Tôod¡u
®[eÏUWm ùTôÚú[¨u ®}Vôh PpXôp
UôßTÓe LÚj§p~ Ø¥®p úUô]
Yô¬§«p S§j§WsúTôp YVe¡t \mUô
(LpXô-u#25)
(i.e., If we scrutinise all the religions which look so different,
we find nothing discrepant at all in them, but they are only
your (Lord’s) sport. They all end in quiescence or mauna, as
rivers merge in the sea).
42\n--- 第47页 ---\nIn this connection Bhagavan also said, when one talks of
brahmakara vritti for the mind, it is something like saying
samudrakara nadi, about the river which has merged in the ocean.
NNNNNiiiiiggggghhhhhttttt
Following Bhagavan’s quotation from the Gita,
Rishikesananda referred to a verse from Mandukya Upanishad
in which the words adi and anta occur. Bhagavan took it out
and explained the text, which says: “That which was not in the
beginning and which won’t be at the end, but which is only in
the middle, can’t be real. Only that can be real which is not
only in the middle, but also at the beginning and the end”.
Dr. Srinivasa Rao asked Bhagavan, “When we enquire
within ‘who am I?’ what is that?”
Bhagavan: It is the ego. It is only that which makes the
vichara also. The Self has no vichara. That which makes the
enquiry is the ego. The ‘I’ about which the enquiry is made is
also the ego. As the result of the enquiry the ego ceases to
exist and only the Self is found to exist.
I asked Bhagavan, “It seems this morning Rishikesananda
quoted some text which says wherever the mind goes, that is
samadhi. How can that be? Our mind goes after whatever it
likes. Can that be samadhi?”
Bhagavan: That passage refers to jnanis. Whatever they
may be doing, there is no break in their samadhi state. Their
bodies may be engaged in whatever activities they were intended
by prarabdha to go through. But they are always in the Self. We
associate or identify ourselves with the body; whatever it does,
we say we do. The Bhagavad Gita says, ‘The wise man will
think the senses move among the sense objects and be unattached
to the activities of the sense organs.’ I would go farther and say
that the jnani does not think even that. He is the Self and sees
nothing apart from himself. What the Bhagavad Gita says in the
43\n--- 第48页 ---\nabove passage is for the abhyasi or the practiser. There is no
harm in engaging in whatever activities naturally come to one.
The hindrance or bondage is in imagining that we are the doers
and attaching ourselves to the fruits of such activities.
In this connection Bhagavan also said, “A man says ‘I
came from Madras’. But in reality ‘he’ did not come. The
jutka or some other vehicle brought him from his house to the
railway station, the train brought him to Tiruvannamalai
railway station, and from there some other cart brought him
here. But he says ‘I came’. This is how we identify ourselves
with the acts of the body and the senses.” Bhagavan also quoted
from the Vedanta Chudamani to the effect that the activities
of the jnani are all samadhi, i.e. he is always in his real state,
whatever his body may happen to be doing. Bhagavan also
referred to Rajeswarananda and said that once he planned to
take a big party of pilgrims with Bhagavan in their midst.
Bhagavan said, “I did not consent to go and the thing had to
be dropped. What is there I could go and see? I see nothing.
What is the use of my going anywhere?” (“TôojRôp Iußm
ùR¬¡\§p~”) This is one of those self-revealing statements,
which sometimes escape Bhagavan’s lips.
The following remarks were also made by Bhagavan
this night:
“The jnani sees he is the Self and it is on that Self as the
screen that the various cinema-pictures of what is called the
world pass. He remains unaffected by the shadows which play
on the surface of that screen.
“See with the ‘E]dLi’ (the physical eye), and you
see the world. See with the ‘Oô]dLi’ (the eye of
realisation), everything appears ‘©WmUUVm’ (as the Self).
“To see an object that is in the dark, both the eye and the
light of a lamp are required. To see the light only, the eye is
enough. But to see the sun, there is no need of any other light.
44\n--- 第49页 ---\nEven if you take the lamp with you, its light will be drowned
in the light of the sun. Our intellect or buddhi is of no use to
realise the Self. To see the world or external objects, the mind
and the reflected light (or chidabhasa) which always arises
with it are necessary. To see the Self, the mind has simply to
be turned inside and there is no need of the reflected light.
“If we concentrate on any thought and go to sleep in that
state, immediately on waking the same thought will continue in
our mind. People who are given chloroform are asked to count
one, two, etc. A man who goes under after saying six for instance
will, when he again comes to, start saying seven, eight, etc.
“In some books, the ego is compared to a leech; before
leaving one body it takes hold of another.”
2222222222-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Bhagavan explained how it is said in books that the
highest possible happiness, which a human being can attain
or which the ten grades of beings higher than man, ending
with gods like Brahma can attain, is like foam in the deluging
flood of the bliss of the Self.
Imagine a man in robust health; of vigorous adult age,
endowed with unsurpassed wealth and power, with intellect
and all other resources, and married to a fair and faithful wife,
and conceive of his happiness.
Each higher grade of being above man is capable of a
hundred-fold greater happiness than that of the grade below.
But the highest happiness of all the eleven grades of being is
only the foam in the flooding ocean of divine bliss.
In this connection Bhagavan narrated the following story:
“A king was passing through a forest in all his pomp and
pageantry, with his army and retinue behind him. He came
across a man with not even a cod-piece on him, lying on the
45\n--- 第50页 ---\nground, with one leg cocked over the other and laughing away,
apparently supremely happy and contented with himself and
all the world. The king was struck with the man’s happy state
and sent for him. But when the king’s men approached the
nude ascetic and delivered the king’s message, he took
absolutely no notice and continued in his ascetic bliss. On
being told of this, the king himself went to the man and even
then the man took no notice. Thereupon it struck the king that
this must be no common man, and said: ‘Swami, you are
evidently supremely happy. May we know what is the secret
of such happiness and from which Guru you learnt it?’
Thereupon the ascetic told the king: ‘I have had twenty-four
Gurus. Everything, this body, the earth, the birds, some
instruments, some persons all have taught me.’ All the things
in the world may be classed as either good or bad. The good
taught him what he must seek. Similarly, the bad taught him
what he must avoid. The ascetic was Dattatreya, the avadhuta.”
After Bhagavan returned from his morning stroll about
8 a.m., some visitor prostrating himself seems to have spilled
out his entire stock — a good quantity — of snuff. Attendant
Krishnaswami noticed it and collected the snuff and threw it out.
This reminded Bhagavan of some incidents in his life. He said,
“Tobacco is a germicide. When I was in Virupakshi Cave, one
day I suddenly found one tooth gave sharp pain when the cold
rice came in contact with it and I could eat no more. I stopped
eating and thought I would have to die of starvation. Vasudeva
Sastri was then living with me. He had gone out at the time.
When he returned to the cave I told him of my toothache. He
said it was nothing and that a little tobacco would cure it, killing
the germs. As we had no tobacco with us, somebody who had
snuff with him gave me a little snuff and advised me to press it
against the tooth and it gave immediate relief, so much so that I
was able to eat my next meal. When I examined the tooth there
appeared to be something like a dot on it. Gradually it became a
46\n--- 第51页 ---\nhole. Later on a gentleman who was a District Munsiff at
Tirukoilur and visiting me came to know of it, and sent a dentist
from Madras. The dentist came, stayed here three days, charging
Rs.300-0-0 for his stay and did nothing substantial, except
cleaning my teeth, pulling out one tooth and a part of another.
“Even before I came here I knew of the power of tobacco.
When the Periyar dam was constructed and the water first
allowed to pass in the canals, the water came on in a flood
and there was plenty of fish in the water. The fishermen used
to divert the water by means of a side channel and let it into a
pond into which they had thrown a number of bundles of
tobacco stems, i.e., the stumps after the leaves had been utilised
for making cigars. The moment the fish got into the pond
they became unconscious or dead on account of the poison of
the tobacco and began to float. And the fishermen got heaps
of fish in this way. Afterwards I came across the following
stanza in RôÙUô]Yo (Thayumanavar) which alludes to the
above practice of fishermen (in §PØ\úY 4).
Ds[j§ àsú[ ùVô°jùRu{ VôhÓ¡u\
Ls[d LÚ|ûVVôu LôÔk RWUôúUô
ùYs[jûR Uôt± ®PdÏiTôo SgãhÓm
Ts[j§u ÁuúTôt TûRjúRu TWôTWúU.
Translation: I am struggling like the fish caught in the
pond whose waters diverted from the flood had been poisoned
by flesh-eaters. Is it possible for me to understand your hidden
kindness. Oh Almighty, who lying concealed in my heart is
moving me about like a puppet?”
After this, at Dr. Srinivasa Rao’s request, Bhagavan
explained the stanza occurring at the end of ‘ÑLYô¬’
commencing ‘FkSôÞm DP-úX’ and the last four stanzas
in ‘UiPXj§u’ of RôÙUô]Yo (Thayumanavar).
Later in the morning, at Rishikesananda’s request Bhagavan
recounted his first experience of the Self in his upstairs room at
47\n--- 第52页 ---\nMadura. “When I lay down with limbs outstretched and mentally
enacted the death scene and realised that the body would be taken
and cremated and yet I would live, some force, call it atmic power
or anything else, rose within me and took possession of me. With
that, I was reborn and I became a new man. I became indifferent
to everything afterwards, having neither likes nor dislikes.” Dr.
Srinivasa Rao asked Bhagavan how he first came to have bhakti.
Bhagavan replied, “The first thing that evoked bhakti in me was
the book ‘Periya Puranam’, which I came across in my house,
which belonged to a neighbour and which I read through. It was
however only after the experience described above that I used to
go daily to the temple and pray that I should become devoted like
one of the sixty-three saints (Nayanmar) of ‘Periya Puranam’.”
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Dr. Srinivasa Rao told the Swami, “I have heard from one,
who said he saw it, that when Bhagavan was in Skandasramam,
a snake once crept over his body.” Bhagavan said, “Snakes raise
their hoods and look into our eyes and they seem to know when
they need not be afraid, and then they pass over us. It did not
strike me either that I should do anything to it.”
Later Bhagavan said, “Even though we usually describe
the reality as Sat, Chit, Ananda, even that is not quite a correct
description. It cannot really be described. By this description
all that we endeavour to make plain is that it is not asat, that
it is not jada and that it is free from all pain.”
Again Bhagavan said, “We are all in reality Sat-Chit-Ananda.
But we imagine we are bound and are having all these pains.”
I asked, “Why do we imagine so? Why does this
ignorance or ajnana come to us?”
Bhagavan said, “Enquire to whom has this ignorance
come and you will find it never came to you and that you
have always been that Sat-Chit-Ananda. One performs all sorts
48\n--- 第53页 ---\nof penances to become what one already is. All effort is simply
to get rid of this viparita buddhi or mistaken impression that
one is limited and bound by the woes of samsara.”
Later Bhagavan said, “The spark of jnana will easily
consume all creation as if it were a mountain-heap of cotton.
All the crores of worlds being built upon the weak (or no)
foundation of the ego, they all topple down when the atomic
bomb of jnana comes down upon them.” Bhagavan said, “All
talk of surrender is like pinching jaggery from the jaggery
image of Lord Ganesa and offering it as naivedya to the same
Lord Ganesa. You say you offer your body, soul and all
possessions to God. Were they yours that you could offer
them? At best, you can only say, ‘I falsely imagined till now
that all these which are yours (God’s) were mine. Now I realise
they are yours. I shall no more act as if they are mine.’ And
this knowledge that there is nothing but God or Self, that I
and mine don’t exist and that only the Self exists, is jnana.”
He added, “Thus there is no difference between bhakti and
jnana. Bhakti is jnana mata or mother of jnana.”
Talking of the innumerable ways of different seekers after
God, Bhagavan said, “Each should be allowed to go his own
way, the way for which alone he may be built. It will not do to
convert him to another path by violence. The Guru will go
with the disciple in his own path and then gradually turn him
into the supreme path at the ripe moment. Suppose a car is
going at top speed. To stop it at once or to turn it at once
would be attended by disastrous consequences.”
The talk then turned to the names of God and Bhagavan
said, “Talking of all mantras, the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad
says ‘AHAM’ is the first name of God. The first letter in Sanskrit
is A ëAí and the last letter Ha ‘h’ and ‘Aha’ thus includes
everything from beginning to end. The word ‘Ayam’ means that
which exists, Self-shining and Self-evident. ‘Ayam’, ‘Atma’,
49\n--- 第54页 ---\n‘Aham’, all refer to the same thing. In the Bible also, ‘I AM’ is
given as the name of God.”
2222244444-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Bhagavan spoke about the way in which in the old days
he used to climb to the peak at any time he felt like it, and
that by any route or even no route. He said only the grass-
cutters knew some of the routes he used. “Sometimes people
would come from Madras and other parts and, setting out to
reach the top of the hill, would stray near Skandasramam.
Finding me seated there, they would ask me for the route to
the hill top. When I told them the route was to their right
and turned northward, some would say. ‘Do you know who
we are and wherefrom we come? We are from Madras. None
of your tricks with us. The top is here straight above us and
you want to lead us astray.’ I used to keep quiet. They would
try to climb in a straight line, and after a long time, they
would return tired out, finding that all their efforts to reach
the peak were in vain. Nearing me, they would bow their
heads in shame and go away, avoiding me.”
2222255555-----1111111111-----4444455555
Bhagavan related how, while he was living in
Skandasramam, cheetahs used to visit him. He mentioned two
such instances. “In one, the cheetah made a terrific roar which
clearly appeared aggressive, but it did nothing to us and went
chasing monkeys. On the other occasion, the cheetah walked
up slowly and majestically and on nearing the Asramam gave a
loud roar, but one in which only peace and no aggression could
be detected, just as if it wanted to announce its arrival and no
more. It came very near, where the hill stream is now flowing
in Skandasramam, and after a time, slowly walked away, giving
another roar, as it were to announce its leave-taking.”
50\n--- 第55页 ---\nAfter breakfast Bhagavan went to Skandasramam
attended by only one attendant as usual. Skandasramam has
been completely repaired and put into perfect condition
recently and the path to it on the hill behind Ramanasramam
has also been improved. To celebrate the occasion and to give
Bhagavan a chance of spending some time in his old Asramam,
which we knew he thoroughly enjoys, it had been arranged
that Bhagavan and all his devotees should spend the day there
and return here only in the evening. There were some two
hundred people crowded into Skandasramam by about 9-30
a.m., and we all returned only in the afternoon. Bhagavan left
at about 4-15 and reached Ramanasramam about 5-30 p.m.
At Skandasramam Bhagavan was in a happy and cheerful
mood. The weather however was a bit too cloudy and chill,
with biting cold winds blowing most of the time. Bhagavan
related at great length and in minute detail various incidents
that occurred during his life at Skandasramam and Virupakshi
Cave. He explained that the name Skandasramam was given
because the Asramam was originally planned and built by
one Kandaswami, an old disciple, at great self-sacrifice and
by his unaided physical efforts. He remarked, “It is a miracle
how, on this hill, when need arises water springs up where
there was none before and where none could have been
suspected. After the need passes, the water also disappears.”
He traced the history of the hill stream now flowing in
Skandasramam, how he first discovered its source further up
and worked with his then disciples to lead it down. There was
a terrific storm and rain one night and it appeared to the
townsmen in the morning, from that distance, as if a big road
had been made overnight. It seems during this occurrence a
tank called Pada Thirtham (TôR ¾ojRm) was completely
filled up and there was mud and rock heaped up to a height of
about fifteen feet where the tank originally stood. (I learnt
later, on 12-12-45, from Bhagavan that half or three-quarters
of this tank was again restored by a devotee).
51\n--- 第56页 ---\nBhagavan also narrated at length the history of the
monkeys associated with his stay in Virupakshi Cave and
Skandasramam, explaining in particular how ùSôi¥l
ûTVu (‘The lame boy,’ Bhagavan’s pet name for him) came
under Bhagavan’s influence. It seems, while Bhagavan was in
Virupakshi Cave, a monkey had been bitten and mauled badly
by the then king monkey and left for dead near the cave.
Bhagavan took pity on him and tended him and he recovered.
Afterwards, he was attached to Bhagavan and was always with
him, getting his daily feed at Bhagavan’s Asramam. When the
other monkeys came there, the lame one would not allow them
to approach Bhagavan and he pointed out to Bhagavan the king
who had made him lame. But later on, all the monkeys used to
come there and used to show regard and love to their erstwhile
enemy, the lame-monkey. In course of time the lame one became
the monkey-king. One day Bhagavan and his party had left
Skandasramam for giripradakshina, leaving the Asramam in
charge of one or two who stayed behind. During Bhagavan’s
absence the lame one and a host of other monkeys came and
broke the twigs and small branches of all the trees at
Skandasramam and played havoc with all they found there.
Bhagavan was wondering why they did so. The next day the
monkeys again came and the lame one got up the highest tree,
reached its highest point and shook it and then got down. This
it seems is a sign of royal precedence among the monkeys.
When Bhagavan offered food as usual to the lame one, he would
not take it, but led the man offering it to where three other
monkeys were sitting, and there he shared his food with them.
The three monkeys were the queens of the deposed king, who
were now the lame one’s queens according to their custom and
usage. Then Bhagavan knew that the lame one had become
king, that the previous day they all came to have his coronation
in Bhagavan’s presence and finding Bhagavan absent expressed
their disappointment and chagrin by breaking branches, etc.
52\n--- 第57页 ---\nThe lame one had afterwards six children by the three queens
and all the six would get a morsel each from Bhagavan when
he took his meal every day. It seems the lame one misbehaved
on two occasions and hurt Bhagavan by hitting him. Each time
Bhagavan thought of punishing him by denying him admission
to his presence. But finding his pet repentant, and seeing that it
was only his monkeyish nature that was responsible, Bhagavan
excused him. One of the occasions was when Bhagavan took
up a plate of milk intended for the monkey and was about to
blow into it to make it cool, as it was too hot for the monkey.
The monkey thought that Bhagavan was taking the milk near
his mouth to drink it himself. Bhagavan said that, at
Skandasramam, sometimes a peacock and serpent used to play
side by side before him, the one with its tail spread out and the
other with its hood raised. Those who played host to all the
numerous devotees on this day were Prof. T.K. Doraiswami
Aiyar and Mr. Satakopa Naidu of Bangalore, both great devotees
of Bhagavan. Of Mr. Naidu, the following is worth narrating as
an interesting study in psychology.
Mr. Naidu has known Bhagavan for about thirty-five
years now. After he had known Bhagavan for some years, it
seems he once came to Virupakshi Cave and, finding Bhagavan
had gone out, sat down at a certain place. After a little time
Bhagavan returned and Mr. Naidu discovered that the place
he had been seated, was the very place that Bhagavan generally
used for his seat. This, it is said, gave Mr. Naidu such a shock
that, though he has become an almost permanent resident of
the Asramam, and has a permanent room of his own inside
the Asramam, he would not come before Bhagavan at all, much
less sit in the hall or dine with Bhagavan. Even earlier, when
Mr. Naidu used to visit the Asramam once or twice a year, he
felt too shy to appear before Bhagavan. He never speaks about
the original incident. I have therefore to be content with
narrating what I have heard from others.
53\n--- 第58页 ---\n2222277777-----1111111111-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Miss Sarojini Hathee Singh (sister of Mr. Hathee Singh,
brother-in-law of Jawaharlal Nehru), who is here now on her
second visit to this place, expressed a desire to have the daily
life of Bhagavan filmed and shown to the world. I told her
Mr. K.K. Nambiar had a similar idea and even took a few
shots with a cine camera a few months back, but either because
there was something wrong with the film or with the operator,
nothing came of it. Miss Hathee Singh said she would arrange
for this after returning from here this time. At meal time Miss
Indumati (a relation of Ambalal Sarabhai), who with her
mother and others had come here from Aurobindo’s darshan
on the 24th instant, asked me if there was any book dealing
with the ordinary life of Bhagavan, including any light or
humorous incidents or remarks. I replied in the negative and
she said there ought to be one. She said, “Before we came
here we did not know Bhagavan was so human and that he
moved so freely, talked and even made humorous remarks.
We knew only of his spiritual eminence. There ought to be a
book which reveals all these aspects which bring him closer
to us as a man.”
2222299999-----1111111111-----4444455555
I went to Vellore on the 27th evening and met Mr. A.Lobo,
District Judge, and his wife at their place this morning. Both
made enquiries about Bhagavan and Mr. Lobo suggested that
there should be some record of Bhagavan’s life and doings at the
Asramam.
From Mr. Lobo’s house I went to Sir Norman Strathie,
Adviser, who was then camping at Vellore. There again naturally
we were talking of the Asramam. He said he had heard of
Bhagavan’s teaching through silence, and added, “we can
understand that.”
54\n--- 第59页 ---\n11111-----1111122222-----4444455555
I returned here last night. Maha Vir Prasad, Chief Engineer
to the U. P. Government who had been staying here for about
twenty days in October and November and who went on a
pilgrimage to Rameswaram and other places, is back here. In
continuation of an old question of his with reference to a certain
passage in Maha Yoga, he asked Bhagavan whether it was
necessary and a condition precedent for a man to watch his
breathing before beginning the mental quest ‘Who am I?’
Bhagavan: All depends on a man’s pakva, i.e., his
aptitude and fitness. Those who have not the mental strength
to concentrate or control their mind and direct it on the quest
are advised to watch their breathing, since such watching will
naturally and as a matter of course lead to cessation of thought
and bring the mind under control.
Breath and mind arise from the same place and when
one of them is controlled, the other is also controlled. As a
matter of fact, in the quest method — which is more correctly
‘Whence am I?’ and not merely ‘Who am I?’ — we are not
simply trying to eliminate saying ‘we are not the body, not
the senses and so on,’ to reach what remains as the ultimate
reality, but we are trying to find whence the ‘I’ thought for the
ego arises within us. The method contains within it, though
implicitly and not expressly, the watching of the breath. When
we watch wherefrom the ‘I’-thought, the root of all thoughts,
springs, we are necessarily watching the source of breath also,
as the ‘I’-thought and the breath arise from the same source.
Mr. Prasad again asked whether, for controlling breath,
the regular pranayama is not better in which 1:4:2 proportion
for breathing in, retaining, and breathing out is prescribed.
Bhagavan replied, “All those proportions, sometimes regulated
not by counting but by uttering mantras, etc., are aids for
controlling the mind. That is all. Watching the breath is also
55\n--- 第60页 ---\none form of pranayama. Retaining breath, etc., is more violent
and may be harmful in some cases, e.g., when there is no
proper Guru to guide the sadhak at every step and stage. But
merely watching the breath is easy and involves no risk.”
An old gentleman, Mr. Swaminatha Aiyar, a vakil from
Dindigul, had come. With him was a male child about three
years old, called Ramana. Apparently the child had not until
then seen Bhagavan, though he had heard a good deal about
Bhagavan. So the boy said in the hall WU÷ûYd LiÓ
©¥fÑ®húPu (i.e., I have now discovered Ramana). This
naturally caused laughter amongst us all and Bhagavan joined
in the laugh.
The old gentleman asked Bhagavan whether one should
not first go through nirvikalpa samadhi before attaining sahaja
samadhi. Bhagavan replied, “When we have vikalpas and are
trying to give them up, i.e., when we are still not perfected, but
have to make conscious effort to keep the mind one-pointed or
free from thought it is nirvikalpa samadhi. When through
practice we are always in that state, not going into samadhi and
coming out again, that is the sahaja state. In sahaja one sees
always oneself. He sees the jagat as swarupa or brahmakara.
What is once the means becomes itself the goal, eventually,
whatever method one follows, dhyana, jnana or bhakti. Samadhi
is another name for ourselves, for our real state.”
In the evening, after parayana, Bhagavan was looking
into a book. Bhagavan turned to me and said it was Glimpses
of Sai Baba by Mr. B.V. Narasimha Aiyar and that Mr. Shroff
had bought it for Bhagavan’s perusal. I said, “Yes, I saw it
in Shroff’s house this morning. I wonder if it contains
anything new, not contained in his previous works on Sai
Baba.” Bhagavan read out the introduction to the book by
Justice Kuppuswami Aiyar. Dr. Syed, who was in the hall,
said he had read the book and that it contained nothing new.
56\n--- 第61页 ---\nHe also said that Mr. Narasimha Aiyar, when questioned on
the subject, could not say whether Sai Baba taught Self-
realisation to anybody. Almost immediately as if to contradict
Dr. Syed, Bhagavan read out from the introduction to the
book a sentence which says that Sai Baba not only granted
boons for material relief to his devotees, but also gave them
a push towards their ultimate goal of Self-realisation.
22222-----1111122222-----4444455555
This morning the Dowager Rani of Vizianagaram with two
or three others came to the hall, having arrived at the Asramam
last night. Dr. Srinivasa Rao was massaging Bhagavan’s feet.
Bhagavan told Dr. Srinivasa Rao, “You go and sit; otherwise
they would come and ask what is the matter with Bhagavan’s
health.” Doctor accordingly stopped massaging. Bhagavan does
not like any fuss to be made about him on any account.
In the afternoon I showed a book called Wonderful India
to Bhagavan. It contained many pictures and Bhagavan went
through the book for more than an hour, looking at the pictures.
44444-----1111122222-----4444455555
About the middle of last month certain rearrangements
were made in the hall, a railing put round Bhagavan’s couch
on the western and southern sides, all the shelves removed to
the eastern half of the hall, etc. When all this was done I
remarked such crowding of furniture near Bhagavan’s couch
might increase the bug-pest. Then we spoke of insecticides
and about DDT, the most effective insecticide discovered
during the war. This morning Lt. Shroff brought some DDT
and sprayed it in the hall and on the furniture, including
Bhagavan’s sofa. Bhagavan advised it should be tried on the
cow-shed and he was very solicitous that if possible the cows
should be rid of all flies now troubling them. Lt. Shroff left
some DDT in the Asramam with instructions as to how it
57\n--- 第62页 ---\nshould be used. We found the Mauni had already with him a
cutting from some paper in which full instructions about the
use of DDT were given.
66666-----1111122222-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Mr. G. Subba Rao spoke to Bhagavan about the late Mauna
Swami of Courtallam. He was with Bhagavan originally in 1906.
He was called Sivayya then. Today Bhagavan recalled that it
was Sivayya who first gave him a kamandalam. It seems Sivayya
stayed with Bhagavan for about a year or so, then went to
Courtallam, and when he again came to Bhagavan about 1909
or 1910, he brought a coconut kamandalam, the first Bhagavan
ever used. Bhagavan took out the picture in the book ‘WUQ
®_Vm’ (Ramana Vijayam) in which there is a picture of
Bhagavan sitting on a rock, holding this particular kamandalam
in his right hand and resting his left hand on his left thigh.
Bhagavan is at the peak of health and strength in this picture.
NNNNNiiiiiggggghhhhhttttt
Referring to the stanza ‘@e¡ÙÚ YôÙùUô°’ (3rd stanza
of Sri Arunachala Mahatmya in Collected Works of Ramana
Maharshi) I asked Bhagavan, whether the cave mentioned in it
is inside God or inside the mountain (which of course is also
said to be God). Bhagavan replied, “Of course, in the context,
it means the cave is inside the hill and that there, in the cave,
are all enjoyments.” Bhagavan added, “The stanza says you
are to believe that inside this hill there is a cave, which is
brilliance itself or which is glorious with light, and that all
enjoyments are to be found there.” I also asked Bhagavan, “I
have read somewhere that this place is called bhoga kshetra. I
wonder what is meant thereby.” Bhagavan replied, “Yes, it is
said so. But what does it mean? If thinking of this kshetra can
itself give mukti, what wonder if this place can give all other
enjoyments one may desire?” Dr. Srinivasa Rao asked whether
58\n--- 第63页 ---\nafter putting oneself the question “Who am I?” one should
remain quiet or whether one should go on to give the answer,
such as “I am not this body, senses, etc.” or whether one should
go on repeating the question “Who am I?”
Bhagavan: “Why should you go on repeating ‘Who am
I?’ as if it is a mantra. If other thoughts arise, then the questions,
‘To whom do these thoughts arise?’, ‘Whence does the ‘I’ to
which these thoughts come arise?’ have to be asked, i.e., to
keep away other thoughts. Even in mantra japam, when the
man fails to repeat the mantra, i.e., when other thoughts begin
to occupy his mind, he reminds himself ‘I have left off the
mantra’ and begins repeating it. The object in all paths is to
keep off all other thoughts except the thought of God or Self.”
In this connection Bhagavan again said “The Name is
God,” and quoted the Bible, ‘In the beginning was the word,
and the word was with God, and the word was God’.” Swami
Ramdas often preaches the importance of Nama smarana,
the Name he uses being Sri Ram Jai Ram Jai Jai Ram. In the
latest issue of Vision Swami Ramdas has written about ‘That
thou art’, and Bhagavan referred me to it.
77777-----1111122222-----4444455555
The September 1937 number of Vision contains an article
on the Philosophy of the Divine Name according to Nam Dev.
Bhagavan frequently refers to it with approval. Today also
Dr. Srinivasa Rao brought it and Bhagavan explained it to
him. Bhagavan remarked, “All this must have been uttered by
Nam Dev after he attained complete realisation, after touching
the feet of Vishopakesar to whom Vithoba sent him for
enlightenment.” Bhagavan then related the following story:
“Vithoba found Nam Dev had not yet realised the Supreme
Truth and wanted to teach him. When Jnaneswar and Nam Dev
returned from their pilgrimage, Gora Kumbhar gave a feast to
59\n--- 第64页 ---\nall the saints in his place and among them were Jnaneswar and
Nam Dev. At the feast, Jnaneswar in collusion with Gora, told
Gora publicly, ‘You are a potter, daily engaged in making pots
and testing them to see which are properly baked and which
are not. These pots before you (i.e., the saints) are the pots of
Brahma. See which of these are sound and which not.’
Thereupon Gora said, ‘Yes Swami, I shall do so’, and took up
the stick with which he used to tap his pots to test their
soundness; and holding it aloft in his hand he went to each of
his guests and tapped each on the head as he usually did to his
pots. Each guest humbly submitted to such tapping. But when
Gora approached Nam Dev, the latter indignantly called out:
‘You potter, what do you mean by coming to tap me with that
stick?’ Gora thereupon told Jnaneswar, ‘Swami, all the other
pots have been properly baked. This one, (i.e., Nam Dev) alone
is not yet properly baked.’ All the assembled guests burst into
laughter. Nam Dev felt greatly humiliated and ran up to Vitthal
with whom he was on the most intimate terms, playing with
him, eating with him, sleeping with him, and so on. Nam Dev
complained of this humiliation which had happened to him,
the closest friend and companion of Vitthal. Vitthal (who of
course knew all this) pretended to sympathise with him, asked
for all the details of the happenings at Gora’s house and after
hearing everything said, ‘Why should you not have kept quiet
and submitted to the tapping, as all the others did? That is why
all this trouble has come.’ Thereupon Nam Dev cried all the
more and said, ‘You also want to join the others and humiliate
me. Why should I have submitted like the others? Am I not
your closest friend, your child?’ Vitthal said, ‘You have not yet
properly understood the truth. And you won’t understand if I
tell you. But go to the saint who is in a ruined temple in such
and such a forest. He will be able to give you enlightenment.’
Nam Dev accordingly went there and found an old, unassuming
man sleeping in a corner of the temple with his feet on a Siva
lingam. Nam Dev could hardly believe this was the man from
60\n--- 第65页 ---\nwhom he — the companion of Vitthal — was to gain
enlightenment. However, as there was none else there, Nam
Dev went near the man and clapped his hands. The old man
woke up with a start and, seeing Nam Dev, said, ‘Oh, you are
Nam Dev whom Vitthal has sent here. Come!’ Nam Dev was
dumb-founded and began to think, ‘This must be a great man.’
Still he thought it was revolting that any man, however great,
should be resting his feet on a lingam. He asked the old man,
‘You seem to be a great personage. But is it proper for you to
have your feet on a lingam?’ The old man replied, ‘Oh, are
my feet on a lingam? Where is it? Please remove my feet
elsewhere.’ Nam Dev removed the feet and put them in various
places. Wherever they were put, there was a Siva lingam.
Finally, he took them on his lap and he himself became a Siva
lingam. Then he realised the truth and the old gentleman said,
‘Now you can go back’.” Bhagavan added, “It is to be noted
that only when he surrendered himself, and touched the feet
of his guru, enlightenment came. After this final enlightenment
Nam Dev returned to his house and for some days did not go
to Vitthal at the temple, though it had been his habit not only
to visit Vitthal every day, but to spend most of his time with
Vitthal at the temple. So after a few days, Vitthal went to Nam
Dev’s house and like a guileless soul enquired how it was that
Nam Dev has forgotten him and never visited him. Nam Dev
replied, ‘No more of your fooling me. I know now. Where is
the place where you are not! To be with you, should I go to
the temple? Do I exist apart from you?’ Then Vitthal said, ‘So
you now understand the truth. That is why you had to be sent
for this final lesson’.”
Bhagavan referred to the article in the Vision of December,
1945 on Sthita Prajna and to the lines from Sat Darshana quoted
in that article. Dr. Syed thereupon asked Bhagavan when Reality
in Forty Verses was made by Bhagavan. Bhagavan said, “It was
recently something like 1928. Muruganar has noted down
61\n--- 第66页 ---\nsomewhere the different dates. One day Muruganar said that
some stray verses composed by me now and then on various
occasions should not be allowed to die, but should be collected
together and some more added to them to bring the whole
number to forty, and that the entire forty should be made into a
book with a proper title. He accordingly gathered about thirty
or less stanzas and requested me to make the rest to bring the
total to forty. I did so, composing a few stanzas on different
occasions as the mood came upon me. When the number came
up to forty, Muruganar went about deleting one after another
of the old collection of thirty or less on the pretext they were
not quite germane to the subject on hand or otherwise not quite
suitable, and requesting me to make fresh ones in place of the
deleted ones. When this process was over, and there were forty
stanzas as required by Muruganar, I found that in the forty there
were but two stanzas out of the old ones and all the rest had
been newly composed. It was not made according to any set
scheme, nor at a stretch, nor systematically. I composed different
stanzas on different occasions and Muruganar and others
afterwards arranged them in some order according to the
thoughts expressed in them to give some appearance of
connected and regular treatment of the subject, viz., Reality.”
(The stanzas contained in the old collection and deleted by
Muruganar were about twenty. These were afterwards added
as supplement to the above work and the Supplement too now
contains 40 verses).
Bhagavan also said, “Marital Garland of Letters was
composed partly at the Virupakshi Cave and partly on my walks
round the hill. Upadesa Saram alone was written with a scheme
and a set purpose and at a stretch at one sitting. That was because
Muruganar had set a limit of one hundred stanzas for the entire
theme of the poem and in it had planned that the particular
subject of Upadesa should be confined to thirty stanzas, of
which again he had already composed three stanzas, leaving
62\n--- 第67页 ---\nthus only twenty-seven stanzas within the brief compass of
which I was required to deal with the whole subject.”
In the afternoon Bhagavan explained to Dr. Srinivasa Rao
the significance of the name Rama. “The ‘Ra’ stands for the
Self and ‘ma’ for the ego. As one goes on repeating ‘Rama’,
‘Rama’, the ‘ma’ disappears, getting merged in the ‘Ra’ and
then ‘Ra’ alone remains. In that state there is no conscious
effort at dhyana, but it is there, for dhyana is our real nature.”
88888-----1111122222-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Dr. Srinivasa Rao took this notebook and read out
yesterday’s entry. Thereupon Bhagavan asked Krishnaswami
to take out the notebook in which Muruganar and others had
noted down the dates on which various stanzas were
composed. We found it was only in 1928 that the Reality in
Forty Verses was composed.
Bhagavan showed me the Tamil paper Hindustan which
contained an article by Tilak Sastri on Bhagavan’s visit to
Skandasramam on 25-11-45, explaining the origin of the name,
among other things.
AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
When I went to the Pathasala to bring some Sanskrit books
at Bhagavan’s instance, an incident occurred in the hall which
is recorded below. Miss Kamdin (now Mrs. McIver) was sitting
next to a lady who went into a trance and purported to have
received sugar candy from Narayana i.e., God. She thinks that
there was no trickery at all in it and that the candy came
mysteriously into the lady’s hands. I also was given a bit of the
candy.
The incident is thus recorded by Mr. K.A. Mahatani:
On 8th December 1945 at about 3-45 p.m., I saw a Gujarati
widow aged about 50 years sitting in the hall with two girls of
63\n--- 第68页 ---\nabout eight and ten years in the front row on the side reserved
for ladies. I could see that she was in samadhi.
After a few minutes she fell on her back quietly in samadhi
posture without stretching her legs. People in the hall thought
that she was in a hysterical fit, but those two girls said that she
was in samadhi and that it often happened to her. Then those
two girls started singing a Gujarati bhajan song in a nice tune.
(The song begins ‘Haji mare gher thaya lila ler’).
Bhagavan was all the time attentively looking at the
lady and enjoying the tune, keeping time by beating his knee
with his hand. I had never before noticed Bhagavan so
interested in any song.
After a few minutes the lady got up without anybody’s
help and sat in samadhi in the same posture, and began to
mutter something in Gujarati. I asked her whether she saw
any vision. She said in Hindustani “Yes,” and added that Sri
Narayan gave a message for all in the hall. “Let them close
their eyes, be still, without any pravritti (i.e., without any
thought or action) and I will give darshan to one and all.”
I translated to Bhagavan what she said. For two or three
minutes she was bowing her head with hands clasped towards
Bhagavan. Then we noticed that she handed over a piece of
sugar candy to one of the two girls sitting near her.
Before that we had seen her open hands quite empty. I
asked the girl what was that sugar candy and how it came into
her hands.
The girl replied, “This is prasad given to the lady by
Bhagavan Narayan; and whenever she goes into samadhi she
gets different things (such as fruit, flowers, garlands, sandal,
kumkum and sweets) on different occasions.”
Then the lady said that she used to get such moods since
she was six years old. The girl presented the piece of sugar
64\n--- 第69页 ---\ncandy to Bhagavan. He partook a little of it and the rest was
distributed among the others who were present in the hall.
I remarked that this was very miraculous. Bhagavan
indicated, ‘Yes’, with only a gesture of his hand, but said
nothing. After a few minutes, the lady left the hall with the two
girls. Before leaving she bowed low to Bhagavan and asked for
his blessings and his permission to go back to Bombay.
I learnt that she had come that morning and left the same
evening. She gave her name in the office as Mataji Maniben
Samadhiwallah, C/o. R.G. Raval, Purshottam Building,
opposite Opera House, Bombay.
99999-----1111122222-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
When yesterday Bhagavan referred to Tilak’s article in
Hindustan, I said, “Our Nagamma has also written an account
in Telugu of the visit of Bhagavan to Skandasramam on 25-11-
45 and the happenings there.” Nagamma had told me previously
about this. This morning, Nagamma brought the writing and
showed it to Bhagavan. He read a little and then said, “Let her
read it. We shall all listen,” and returned the paper to her. Before
she could read it out, Bhagavan began talking to us about other
matters. Bhagavan said that the old disciple Kandaswami was
anxious to build a separate Asramam for Bhagavan. He
inspected various places on the hill and in the forests to select a
site, and finally suggested the present Skandasramam site and
then Bhagavan also approved of it. Thereupon Kandaswami
began converting what was a thick forest of prickly pear on the
mountain slope. The result of his labours, unaided by any at
the time, is the Asramam we see now. He added, “You cannot
imagine the state the site was in originally. Kandaswami worked
with almost superhuman effort, achieved by his own hands what
even four people together could not have done. He removed all
the prickly pear, reduced stone and boulder to level ground,
65\n--- 第70页 ---\ncreated a garden and raised the Asramam. We got four coconut
trees for planting. To plant them properly Kandaswami dug
huge square pits about ten feet deep. That would give you an
idea of the amount of labour he put into the work he took on
hand. He was a strong, well-built man.” Then Bhagavan showed
us a group photo in Self-Realisation in which the above
Kandaswami, Perumalswami, Palaniswami, Sivaprakasam
Pillai, Narayana Reddi, Iswara Swami, etc., are sitting with
Bhagavan. The photo was taken on a rock behind Virupakshi
Cave. He then added, “Kandaswami looks like a weak and lean
man in this photo. That is because he went away from us for
more than a month and was doing tapas at ‘GÝ Ñ{’ (Seven
Springs) and was purposely underfeeding himself. Before that,
he was a muscular, well-built man. He went away with only some
flour and a little jaggery to Seven Springs and lived there for
about one and a half months, living only on these scanty
provisions. One night at about 7 p.m. myself, Perumalswami,
Nagappa Chetti and possibly one or two others went in search of
Kandaswami and found him sleeping inside the rocks at Seven
Springs. Perumalswami went inside and brought out
Kandaswami’s conch. Kandaswami and Perumalswami were
adepts at blowing long, continuous blasts on the conch.
Perumalswami blew a loud, long blast outside the cave.
Kandaswami woke up and, recognising that it was Perumalswami
that was blowing the conch, came out. Seeing me, he prostrated
himself. We all spent the night there. We finished what was left
of the flour and jaggery which he had, and burnt away the firewood
he had gathered, made it impossible for him to continue there
and persuaded him to come away with us. It was because of his
fasting and tapas that you find him lean in this photo.”
Bhagavan proceeded to describe how Perumalswami and
Kandaswami used to blow in concert on the conch and how
when Bhagavan was in Virupakshi Cave, Perumalswami,
Kandaswami and Palaniswami used to go about begging in
66\n--- 第71页 ---\nthe streets for food and bring it up the hill and all there used
to share it. Before Perumalswami joined them, Palaniswami
and Ayyaswami and Kandaswami would go to a chattram and
the manigar would give food for all. But when Perumalswami
also joined, the manigar began questioning why an addition
was necessary. Thereupon Perumalswami laid down that they
should no longer go to the chattram or be at the mercy of the
manigar, but would go and beg in the town. Accordingly, a
party of four or more would leave the cave on this errand.
When leaving the cave, they would blow a long blast on their
conches. This was an announcement to the town’s people that
Bhagavan’s party had left the cave on their begging mission.
The party would give another blast when they reached the
foot of the hill. A third call would be sounded at the entrance
to the street. All the residents of the street would be ready
with their offerings and the party would march along the street
singing some Sivanamavali and collecting the offerings. The
food collected was ample, it seems, for all who gathered near
Bhagavan and all the monkeys, etc. Marital Garland of Letters
was specially composed for use by the begging party.
Bhagavan humorously added, “Marital Garland of Letters fed
us for many years.”
1111100000-----1111122222-----4444455555
Yesterday or the day before, in the morning, a snake was
seen by Chinnaswami and others in the Asramam premises
somewhere near Bhagavan’s hall. We heard the cries, “What
kind of snake is it?” “Beat it! Beat it!” When we heard the
noise of actual beating, Bhagavan cried out ‘Vôo @¥d¡\Õ?’
‘Vôo @¥d¡\Õ?’ (“Who is beating it?”) Apparently this
remonstrance of Bhagavan was not heard by the party, and
the snake was killed. Bhagavan, added, ‘BYeL} @lT¥
ùWiÓ ùLôÓjRôp @lúTô ùR¬Ùm’ (“If these persons
are beaten like that, then they will know what it means.”)
67\n--- 第72页 ---\nNNNNNiiiiiggggghhhhhttttt
Mr. P. C. Desai read out in the hall the manuscript prepared
by Mr. M. Venkatarama Ayyar on Arunachala Mahatmyam.
1111111111-----1111122222-----4444455555
About 6-30 p.m. a young man, Mr. Ramachandra Reddi of
Begampet, Hyderabad (Deccan), who came here a few months
back and stayed a day or two and took some pictures of Bhagavan
with his cine camera, told Bhagavan that he had a film of about
100 feet ready and, if permitted, he would project it before
Bhagavan. Bhagavan had no objection and so he made two
persons hold a white sheet at the western end of the hall and on
that screen projected the pictures he had taken — Bhagavan
coming from the hall, meeting Narayana Iyer’s son Ramanathan,
holding their youngest child, touching with his stick and speaking
to him, etc., Bhagavan coming from the cow-shed, climbing the
hill and then returning from there, being followed by Mrs.
Taleyarkhan and Miss Soona Dorabji and some other scenes.
We all appreciated the pictures. But Bhagavan could not see them
clearly. It was a revelation to us how poor his sight was. Then for
his benefit the screen was held near the southern window opposite
Bhagavan’s sofa and the pictures were projected again, but he
could not see them clearly even then.
Bhagavan said in this connection that once Mr. Grant
Duff or someone else wrote to the Asramam that they saw
some film of Bhagavan in Hollywood. Bhagavan said, “We
knew nothing about it. But apparently someone had come and
snapped me when I was moving on the hill.”
Mr. K. K. Nambiar also took about 100 feet of film some
6 months back. But it seems to have been a failure. Our
Venkatoo said in the hall that some years ago Jayadevlal’s
friend took some pictures with a cine camera, but as they had
heard nothing more of them, they too must have been a failure.
68\n--- 第73页 ---\n1111122222-----1111122222-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Mr. Desai continued his reading about 10 a.m. When he
read about one Kuppaiyar who was lame and afterwards got
the use of his legs, about 40 years ago, and Bhagavan said he
knew of the incident and that he had seen Kuppaiyar after he
got better, I said “@Õ TLYôu ùNnRÕRôöm. SUdÏ
ùNôp\§p~. @RàûPV §ÚhÓjR]m Rôu @Õ” (i.e.,
it would appear that it was really done by Bhagavan, though
he does not speak to us about it. It is his stealthy way). I said
so because Bhagavan’s old classmate Ranga Aiyar and one
other at least who could be trusted to know about it had assured
me that, from what Bhagavan had told them of this incident,
they were convinced that it was only Bhagavan who had
worked the miracle. When I made the above remark in the
hall to those near me in Bhagavan’s presence and hearing, he
did not deny my assumption. Bhagavan related to me once
the following incident that happened when he was living on
the hill: “A cartman was engaged one night by a lady new to
this town to take her to some street. The cartman purposely
took her to some out-of-the-way place near the hill and was
about to attack her for her jewels or molest her. Then two
constables appeared on the scene and threatened the cartman
and escorted the lady to her proper destination. The lady noted
the numbers of the constables and made enquiries afterwards
about them and it was ascertained that no human police
constable had ever done such a service on that night.” Ranga
Aiyar believes that this was also really Bhagavan’s work. I
concur with him now. For from the way Bhagavan narrated
the incident, even at the time I first heard it from his lips, I
had the same suspicion, though Bhagavan ascribed the incident
to Arunachala. We cannot tax Bhagavan with falsehood. He
describes what he did as having been done by Arunachala,
because he and Arunachala are one.
69\n--- 第74页 ---\nAAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
As I was entering the hall about 2-50 p.m., Bhagavan was
reading out from the Tamil Arunachala Puranam the verses in
which it is said that Gauri, after crossing the several streets of
Arunachalam, reached Gautama’s Asramam. When Bhagavan
came to the verses dealing with Gautama’s joy at Gauri’s coming
to his Asramam, Bhagavan could not go on, for tears filled his
eyes and emotion choked his voice. So he laid aside the book
and Desai continued his reading of the manuscript. I may here
record that I have noticed on more than one occasion in the past
how Bhagavan could not proceed with the reading of any deeply
devotional portions of Tamil works such as Thevaram and
devotional hymns of Thayumanavar. This afternoon when I took
from Bhagavan the above Arunachala Puranam and referred to
the portion which moved him so deeply and told him, in effect,
that I had discovered his plight which he tried to hide from us all,
he remarked, “I don’t know how those people who perform
kalakshepam and explain such passages to audiences manage to
do it without breaking down. I suppose they must first make
their hearts hard like stone before starting their work.”
In the course of Mr. Desai’s reading of the manuscripts, he
read about the holy hill having eight faces. To a question of mine
whether as a matter of fact this hill has eight faces, Bhagavan
replied, “The purana says that the Ashta Vasus having flattered
themselves in Brahma’s presence lost all their merit, and to regain
it they came and did penance here all round Arunachala. They
were given darshan by Siva at one and the same time by Siva
assuming eight faces in this hill. All those eight Vasus are still in
the shape of eight spurs round this hill. What is meant by saying
all those Vasus are still here as hills and doing penance round this
holy hill, it is difficult to understand. Does it only mean they are
living on these hills and doing penance, or are they themselves
these hills?” He added, “It is difficult now for us to locate where
the Ashta Dikpalakas actually stood sentry, whether at the spots
70\n--- 第75页 ---\nwhere the Ashta Dik Lingams are now found or whether the
lingams are those which were installed and worshipped by them.
We cannot be sure where exactly Gauri did penance and where
Gautama had his Asramam. But it would be safe to assume that
Gauri did her penance in the region covered by Pavalakunru,
Durga temple and Pachaiamman Koil and that Gautama’s
Asramam must have also been near this region.”
Bhagavan also said that whatever temple might have
originally existed on or about Pavalakunru would seem to have
disappeared probably on account of Tippu’s invasion, that the
present temple there was built only about fifty years ago and that
he once discovered the remains of an old cannon between
Pavalakunru and the northern wall of the Big Temple. It would
appear that Tippu Sultan placed cannon near Pavalakunru and
attacked the northern wall of the temple which was then used as
a fort. The northern wall still bears traces of cannon shots. It
seems the information given by Bhagavan was conveyed to the
Government and the cannon was carried away and kept as a relic.
NNNNNiiiiiggggghhhhhttttt
For the benefit of those who could not see Bhagavan’s
film on the 11th night, it was again shown today at about 6-30
p.m. in the dining hall. Before we went there Bhagavan said
that Yogananda and also one Shukla who was a Guru of the
American lady (Mrs. Noye) had taken cine pictures of Bhagavan
and that the latter’s pictures might have eventually reached
Hollywood and come to the notice of Grant Duff or others who
wrote to the Asramam.
1111166666-----1111122222-----4444455555
In the Sunday Times of 16-12-45 an article entitled “In
silent adoration of Sri Maharshi”, by V.F. Gunaratna, of Ceylon
had appeared. I perused it in the hall. Bhagavan remarked, “Dr.
Syed has read it and thinks it insipid.” Thereupon I said, “There
71\n--- 第76页 ---\nis nothing to complain of in it. In fact, I read it long ago, probably
about last Jayanti time, when Mr. Ramachandra of Colombo
showed me the manuscript.” The article states Bhagavan’s
teaching, correctly if briefly, though it has nothing new to tell
us who are already well acquainted with him and his teaching.
1111177777-----1111122222-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
An article in the Sunday Herald of 16-12-45 entitled ‘The
Maharshi who transforms man’s life’ by Dr. Syed was read
out in the hall. Dr. Syed said the title he gave was different
but the editor had changed it. Bhagavan also perused another
article by Dr. Syed on the significance of Mohurrum which
appeared in Free India of 16-12-45.
EEEEEvvvvveeeeennnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Dr. Syed said that the title he gave was ‘Ramana
Maharshi’s invisible work’.
1111199999-----1111122222-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Some lady introduced another lady to Bhagavan, saying
“Subbu has come”. Bhagavan could not make out who this
Subbu was. But, when it was explained to him who the lady
was, he said, “Ñl×Ïh¥Vô” (Is it Subbukutti?) and
recognised her as the younger sister of Chellam Bhattar of
Thiruchuzhi who had visited him recently. This lady seems
to have been a small girl with whom Bhagavan had played
in his boyhood. He told us, “This lady had an aunt who used
to take me to her house and pet me when I was a child.” I
asked, “Where is that lady now?” Bhagavan said, “She died
long ago and her husband married again and had several
children.”
Dr. Syed is old and has various ailments which render it
very difficult for him to go round the Hill. However, as he
72\n--- 第77页 ---\nfound that Bhagavan sets great store by his disciples going round
the Hill he and his wife decided to try it about a month back.
They took Bhagavan’s permission and went round and came
back without any difficulty or untoward incident. Today again
they both came to Bhagavan and took permission to go round
the Hill. Bhagavan used to say that if one went round the Hill
once or twice, the Hill itself would draw one to go round it
again. I have found it true. Now this is happening to Dr. Syed.
My two sons and their wives and children and about ten
more relations of mine arrived this night and when I introduced
them, Bhagavan made kind inquiries whether I had been able to
get suitable accommodation, etc., for them. Bhagavan is equally
solicitous about the comfort of everybody who comes here. How
can one help loving him and becoming bound to his feet?
2222211111-----1111122222-----4444455555
This is Bhagavan’s Jayanti (65th birthday). The crowd
of devotees is greater than usual, many of them having come
from distant parts. There were the usual decorations, music,
feast and feeding of the poor. In the afternoon a number of
prayers and verses in honour of Bhagavan specially composed
for the occasion were read out. A message sent by Swami
Sivananda (of Rishikesh) was also read out.
2222233333-----1111122222-----4444455555 AAAAAfffffttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnnoooooooooonnnnn
Mons. Georges Le Bot, Private Secretary to the Governor
of Pondicherry, and Chief of Cabinet of the French Government
there, came to Bhagavan. He could not easily squat down on
the floor and so Bhagavan asked us to give him a seat. We
placed for him a chair opposite to Bhagavan. He had brought
with him his request written in French. After expressing his
greetings to Bhagavan through some interpreters who came
with him and who spoke Tamil, he produced his French writing.
Our Balaram Reddi tried to interpret the same to Bhagavan.
73\n--- 第78页 ---\nBut he found it rather difficult, as the French was rather high-
flown. So we sent for Mr. Osborne (whose wife and three
children have been living for nearly five years here and who
himself returned from Siam about a month back) and he came
and explained the gist as follows: “I know little. I am even less.
But I know what I am speaking about. I am not asking for words,
explanations or arguments, but for active help by Maharshi’s
spiritual influence. I did some sadhana and attained to a stage
where the ego was near being annihilated. I wanted the ego to
be annihilated. But at the same time I wanted to be there to see it
being killed. This looked like having contradictory desires. I pray
Maharshi may do something by his influence, in which I fully
believe, to enable me to reach the final stage and kill the ego. I do
not want mere arguments or explanations addressed to the mind,
but real help. Will Maharshi please do this for me?”
He had also written out another question: “I have been
having for my motto ‘Liberate yourself’. Is that all right or
would Maharshi suggest any other motto or ideal for me?”
Bhagavan kept silent for a few minutes, all the while
however steadily looking at the visitor. After a few minutes the
visitor said, “I feel that I am not now in a state in which I can
readily receive any influence which Maharshi may be pleased
to send. After some time, I shall come again when I am in that
state of exaltation in which I may be able to assimilate his
influence or spiritual help.” He added, “May I have a little
conversation with this interpreter (Mr. Osborne) and come here
some other time?” Bhagavan said, “Yes, you can certainly go
and have some talk.” They both went out. The Sarvadhikari
gave the visitor some fruits and coffee and he took leave
expressing his desire to come here some other time. After the
visitor left the hall, Bhagavan said, “He seems to have read
about all this and to have done some sadhana. He is certainly
no novice.” Someone suggested that the books in French, in
our library, on Bhagavan’s teachings might be shown to the
74\n--- 第79页 ---\nvisitor. They were accordingly taken out and shown to him while
he was still with the Sarvadhikari, having coffee. He looked at
them and said he had read them all.
Mr. Subramania Iyer (Assistant Director of Public
Health Madras, who has been coming to Bhagavan for some
years now) brought an album, containing 41 photos (taken
by Dr. T.N. Krishnaswami on 25-11-45) of Bhagavan at
Skandasramam and presented it to the Asramam. Bhagavan
looked at the pictures, which were all good, except one or
two spoiled slightly by the sunlight.
2222244444-----1111122222-----4444455555 MMMMMooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
Bhagavan asked Mr. T.P. Ramachandra Aiyar to read out
a letter written by Mr. Subramania Iyer (Dindigul), a brother of
our Viswanatha Brahmachari. It gave an account of the grand
way in which Bhagavan’s Jayanti was celebrated at Tiruchuzhi
on the 21st instant. Mr. Subramania Iyer was writing a letter to
Mr. S. Doraiswamy Iyer, giving an account of the conversation
between Georges Le Bot and Bhagavan. It was read out in the
hall for the benefit of all assembled. I also read out the account
of the same happening recorded in this diary.
A visitor asked if he could do both pranayama and
dhyana. Bhagavan said, “One is a help to the other. Whether
one need do pranayama depends on one’s pakva or fitness.”
EEEEEvvvvveeeeennnnniiiiinnnnnggggg
After parayana, Mr. Osborne said that before Mons.
Georges Le Bot left, he said the following: “I had the
experience described by me, twice, first by my own efforts,
and the second time under the silent influence of a French
philosopher now dead, who held my wrist and brought me to
the same stage without any effort on my part. Both times I
kept approaching the breaking point in waves but shrank back.
75\n--- 第80页 ---\nIt was because of the second experience that I decided that
Maharshi could again bring me to that point.”
To the visitor who pursued the question about
pranayama, Bhagavan said, “The aim is to make the mind
one-pointed. For that pranayama is a help, a means. Not only
for dhyana but in every case where we have to make the mind
one-pointed, it may be even for a purely secular or material
purpose, it is good to make pranayama and then start the other
work. The mind and prana are the same, having the same
source. If one is controlled, the other is also controlled at the
same time. If one is able to make the mind one-pointed without
the help of pranayama, he need not bother about pranayama.
But one who cannot at once control the mind, may control
the breath and that will lead to control of the mind. It is
something like pulling a horse by the reins and making it go
in one direction.”
Bhagavan asked Mr. Osborne if Mons. Le Bot had
mentioned the name of the French philosopher who had helped
him to attain the experience referred to by him. Mr. Osborne
could not give the name, but said the philosopher, now dead,
seems to have been one trained in and following the ancient
Greek philosophy. Bhagavan remarked, “It could not be
Guenon, as that philosopher is said to be dead.”
Bhagavan continued, “He says he has ‘Liberate Yourself’
for his motto. But why should there be any motto? Liberation
is our very nature. We are that. The very fact that we wish for
liberation shows that freedom from all bondage is our real
nature. That has not got to be freshly acquired. All that is
necessary is to get rid of the false notion that we are bound.
When we achieve that, there will be no desire or thought of any
sort. So long as one desires liberation, so long, you may take it,
one is in bondage.” He also said, “People are afraid that when
ego or mind is killed, the result may be a mere blank and not
happiness. What really happens is that the thinker, the object of
76