\n--- 第1页 ---\nFACE TO FACE WITH
SRI RAMANA MAHARSHI\n--- 第2页 ---\nOde to Sri Ramana Maharshi
Eternity has worn a human face,
Contracted to a little human span,
Lo, the Immortal has become a man,
A self-imprisoned thing in time and space.
.
Harindranath Chattopadhyaya
pp. 63-4\n--- 第3页 ---\nFACE TO FACE WITH
SRI RAMANA MAHARSHI
Enchanting and Uplifting Reminiscences of
202 persons
Compiled and Edited by
Professor Laxmi Narain
Chief Editor, Sri Ramana Jyothi
(Monthly Journal of Sri Ramana Kendram, Hyderabad)
(Formerly Dean, Faculty of Commerce,
Founding Head and Professor,
Department of Business Management,
Osmania University, Hyderabad.)
Foreword by
Padma Vibhushan Dr. T. N. Chaturvedi
Formerly Governor of Karnataka
2009
Sri Ramana Kendram, Hyderabad\n--- 第4页 ---\n@ Sri Ramana Kendram, Hyderabad
Published by:
Sri Ramana Kendram
2-2-1109/A Batkammakunta
Sivam Road, Hyderabad - 500 013.
Phone: (040) 2742 4092
First edition: 2005
Reprint, with extended index: 2007
Second edition: 2009
Price: Rs. 250
The material contained in this book can be
freely used in any form, including translation,
provided President, Sri Ramana Kendram,
Hyderabad, is informed about it.
ISBN: 81-903538-0-2
Distributed by:
Jaico Publishing House E-mail: hyderabad.sales@jaicobooks.com
Motilal Banarsidass Publishers E-mail: mlbd@vsnl.com
Also available at Sri Ramana Kendram,
at the above address, after satsangs
from 9 to 10.30 a.m. on Sundays.
Cover picture (1948):
Sri Ramana Maharshi – Overflowing Joy and Eternal Peace
Printed by: Sai Security Printers Pvt. Ltd.
152, DLF, Industrial Area, Faridabad - 121 003 (Haryana)
Phone : 0129-2272277 Fax : 0129-2256239
E-mail: sspdel@saiprinters.com\n--- 第5页 ---\nPREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
The pages that follow contain first-hand experiences of a hun-
dred and sixty (160) individuals, including twenty eight foreigners from
across the globe, who visited / interacted with Sri Ramana Maharshi
(1879-1950). Some of these persons also had an opportunity to serve /
live with him. The book provides a comprehensive, not exhaustive, record
of such experiences. The figure 160 is the extent to which we could go!
The number of beneficiaries of the Maharshi’s grace while he
was in the mortal frame is very large, but the limitation as usual was lack
of inclination and inspiration of the individuals to record the event. We
are indeed grateful to the chroniclers for leaving behind a record of ex-
periences of their visits / stay at the Ashram.
The reminiscences tell us about the Maharshi’s philosophy, his
teachings and his love for all living beings, including animals and plants.
They reveal how sincere aspirants felt the impact of the irresistible light
of the Maharshi’s eyes which penetrated their inner being, and also how
the peace and bliss got transmitted through celestial vibrations released
by the Maharshi’s presence.
Many write-ups in the book bring out the Maharshi as a perfect
being, notwithstanding the overpowering and debilitating vrittis (tenden-
cies) inherent in human beings. This is indeed unique, as even our ava-
tars could not always transcend the constraints of their physical form.
Many descriptions in the text make us feel that the jivanmukta (eman-
cipated while yet in the physical body) and the sthitaprajna (a person of
steadfast wisdom) as envisoned in our scriptures, are not mere concepts
but the reality authenticated by the Maharshi.
The encomiums showered upon the Maharshi by the contibutors
make the reader recall Einstein’s historic tribute to Mahatma Gandhi:
“Generations to come will scarce believe that such a one as this ever in
flesh and blood walked upon this earth.”
The reader of these pages will discover that spirituality is not
something vague and uncertain but substantial and proven as got mani-
fested in the Maharshi.
The text offers an insight into the myriad dimensions of the life
at the Maharshi’s ashrams on the Arunachala hill and in its vicinity. It\n--- 第6页 ---\nvi Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
also helps us to understand the Maharshi’s philosophy, which is to achieve
Self-realisation through persistent and intensive introspection on the ba-
sic question – Who am I? It is essentially the same approach as enunci-
ated by celebrated Greek philosopher Socrates (469-399 B.C.) – “Man
know thyself. The unexamined life is not worth living.”
The reminiscences presented here have no particular order and
are independent of each other. They begin with the chronicler’s brief
biographical sketch, which sounds limited in many cases due to lack of
information. This is because many devotees have chosen the tradition of
underplaying the self.
. The views and experiences of the chroniclers have at places
been edited to make the presentation incisive and precise.
Some sentences in the text signifying the exalted state of
the Maharshi are in bold face, at our instance. The word ‘Ashram’
when it refers to Sri Ramanasramam, is with capital ‘A’.
. Many chroniclers have reverently referred to Sri Ramana as
Bhagavan, the title by which he was widely known during his life time.
Some authors have also used capital letters, e.g., He or His, while refer-
ring to the Maharshi.
The text is almost wholly based on the publications of Sri Rama-
nasramam,Tiruvannamalai; Ramana Maharshi Centre for Learning,
Bangalore; and David Godman’s three-part The Power Of The Pres-
ence – Transforming Encounters with Sri Ramana Maharshi. We
feel deeply indebted to these sources for their permission to use the
material.
Glossary at the end is intended to explain non-English, italicised
words. It also contains brief notes on important Sanskrit and Tamil works
referred to in the text. References of the Sources of Material Used
furnish details of source in each case. This is followed by Alphabetical
List of Contributors.
Index is preceded by a collection of Accolades Showered upon
Sri Ramana, which seem to defy all laudations and extolments.
I am grateful to Padma Vibhushan awardee Dr. T.N. Chaturvedi,
Governor of Karnataka and formerly Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India, for acceding to my request to write the Foreword.
I am thankful to Dr. V. Ramadas Murthy for his meticulous proof
reading, and to Smt. Lalitha Krithivasan, Sri V. Krithivasan, Sri N.S.
Ramamohan, Sri P.S. Sundaram, Sri C.R.P. Setty, Prof. Shiv K. Kumar,\n--- 第7页 ---\nPreface to First Edition vii
Prof. M. Sivaramakrishna, Sri David Godman, Sri J. Jayaraman, Dr.
Sushma Narayan and others for their help in the preparation of this book.
I sincerely thank Sri N.S. Ramamohan and Smt. Uma Sudhakar
Rayilla– self-effacing and sincere devotees of our Kendram, Sri
Nrupender Rao, Chairman, Pennar Industries Ltd., Hyderabad, and my
daughter Dr. Sushma Narayan, a paediatrician in Delhi, for funding the
production cost of the book. Thanks are due to them all the more be-
cause they would not have liked to be identified.
The printing cost of the book is an offering to Sri Ramana by my
former student Sri Vijay R. Raghavan of Sai Security Printers Ltd., New
Delhi, who deserves my sincere thanks.
The photographs in the book are an offering to Sri Ramana from
my son-in-law Sri Sanjiv Narayan, for which I am thankful to him.
This book is a humble offering at the feet of Sri Ramana
Maharshi on his 125th jayanti, which is also the Silver Jubilee
Year of Sri Ramana Kendram, Hyderabad.
Laxmi Narain
(narainprof@yahoo.com)
Notes:
1. Chinnaswami alias Niranjananandaswami was sarvadhikari (chief manager)
of Sri Ramanasramam, Tiruvannamalai from 1928 to 1953. At present, the chief
of the Ashram is called ‘President’. Sri Ramana Maharshi, who attained
mahanirvana in April 1950, continues to be the sole spiritual head.
2. The Mountain Path is being published quarterly by Sri Ramanasramam, since
1964. The journal The Call Divine, devoted to Sri Ramana Maharshi, published
from Bombay, first appeared in 1952 and ceased publication in 1975.
3. David Godman, a Britisher who made Tiruvannamalai his home in 1976, has
made substantial and valuable contribution to Sri Ramana literature.
The Ashram’s web site is: www.sriramanamaharshi.org\n--- 第8页 ---\nPREFACE TO SECOND EDITION
The addition of 42 reminiscences takes the total to 202 (101+101).
The effort is to have a comprehensive collection of the impressions,
feelings, and experiences of those who had the privilege of being in the
vicinity of Sri Ramana – the Maharshi.
The chroniclers added in this edition include Sri C.
Rajagopalachari (no.192) and Sri Apa B. Pant (no.199). They later served
as Governor-General of India, and India’s High Commissioner in U.K.,
respectively. Sri Shankarlal Banker (no.167), a close associate of Mahatma
Gandhi, regularly communicated his elevating experiences to the
Mahatma. Of the five foreigners – one each was from U.K. (no.173),
France (no.175) and Poland (no.194). The two from U.S.A. (nos. 163
& 198), stayed at the Ashram for three years, and one of them (Sri
Robert Adams) devoted himself to preach Sri Ramana’s philosophy back
home.
The reminiscences provide an insight into the spiritual height of
the twentieth century maharshi, who was self-obliteration personified,
and who spoke through silence. A British journalist records, “I like him
greatly because he is so simple and modest, when an atmosphere of
authentic greatness lies so palpably around him.” (P. 18) One can easily
count up the number of words he uses in a single day.” (P. 17)
As before, the reminiscences have no particular order and are
independent of each other. While retaining the original contents, the matter
has been edited as necessary.
My thanks are due to many for their willing help and support. In
particular, I am indebted to Smt. Lalitha Krithivasan, Sri V. Krithivasan,
Sri P.S. Sundaram, Prof. M. Sivaramakrishna, Sri T.V. Chandramouli,
Sri David Godman, Sri G. Srihari Rao, Sri Ramamani, Sri J. Jayaraman,
Sri N.S. Ramamohan and Sri V.S. Ramanan.
I am beholden to my former student Sri Vijay R. Raghavan whose
Sai Security Printers at Faridabad, has been considering the printing cost
as an offering to the Maharshi.
Laxmi Narain
(narainprof@yahoo.com)\n--- 第9页 ---\nGOVERNOR RAJ BHAVAN
KARNATAKA BANGALORE
FOREWORD
Sri Ramana Maharshi is one of the unique shining stars on the
spiritual firmament of our country which is legitimately proud of its rich
and variegated heritage as well as of its saints, seers and sages from
times immemorial.
As a young boy in quest of self-realisation Ramana Maharshi
arrived in Tiruvannamalai (Tamil Nadu) and lived on or near the sacred
hill – Arunachala, for a contiunous period of 54 years, till he left the body.
He mostly kept silence but his silence was eloquent in that it attracted
seekers from far and wide. He was looked upon by many as an incarnation
of Lord Siva in the form of Dakshinamurthi. [See annexure-V, p. 415.]
The Maharshi’s message is the summation and essence of the
teachings of our ancient scriptures.
The Maharshi’s luminous personality radiated serenity and
provided solace to those who approached him. The doubts and skepticism
of many would just vanish by the glow of his eyes. Always resting in the
depths of his own inner self, his very glance will many times answer and
resolve the questions that the visitors and devotees would have liked to
ask.
The Maharshi was neither a philosopher nor a preacher but a
realised soul. People of great distinction and knowledge have testified to
it. His teachings, focused on the query “Who am I”, are both simple and
profound. They are largely contained in his pithy replies to the questions
put before him or doubts expressed by the seekers.
Over the years Ramana literature, both biographical and
philosophical, has grown and is growing. The present book Face to Face
with Sri Ramana Maharshi belongs to both categories. It contains the
living testimony of those who came in touch with or had the good fortune
to have the Maharshi’s darshan and could feel the elevating and enlight-
ening impact of his magnetic presence. The compilation contains extracts
from their writings, bearing witness to what the Maharshi meant to them
and how they got illumined in their spiritual quest.\n--- 第10页 ---\nx Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
The book representing the extensive and deep study of the compiler-
editor, Prof. Laxmi Narain is not merely scholastic but imbued with shraddha
(reverential faith). Wherever deemed necessary, apart from providing
biographical information, he has given annotations which facilitate better
comprehension of the significance of Ramana Maharshi to the common
reader. This book is certainly a companion to one seeking the path. It is
indeed a valuable addition to the growing corpus of Ramana literature.
Prof. Laxmi Narain is presently the Chief Editor of Sri Ramana
Jyothi, monthly journal of Sri Ramana Kendram, Hyderabad, as a labour
of love. He is a highly reputed economist and his pioneering and path-
breaking books on public sector or state undertakings and their different
aspects brought him great renown in the country and abroad. Decades
back I met him and got to know him in that capacity. It came as a pleasant
surprise when he asked me to write a foreword to the present compilation
which he has so labouriously and imaginatively prepared. I feel deeply
touched by this unmerited honour and would like to express my thanks to
my learned friend, Prof. Laxmi Narain.
I believe that the book will have the welcome that it richly deserves
by its discerning readers and devotees. With this earnest hope I commend
this work of Prof. Laxmi Narain which seems to me to be the sublime,
symbolic and subtle vehicle of the Grace of Ramana Maharshi which
may always abide with him and with us all.
June 26, 2005 T.N. CHATURVEDI
Padma Vibhushan awardee Dr. Triloki Nath Chaturvedi is a rare blend of administrative,
academic, political, accounting, spiritual and governing distinctions. He was Secretary,
Ministry of Education and Culture and thereafter Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government of India. He is Chairman of the premier research and training institute of the
country in the area of public administration – Indian Institute of Public Administration,
New Delhi, and was the editor of its prestigious journal for 28 years. Doctorates honoris
causa have been conferred upon him by Punjab University, Chandigarh, and by Lal
Bahadur Shastri Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, New Delhi, a deemed university. He was
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India for six years. Elected to the Rajya Sabha in
1992 and reelected in 1998, he was a member of the panel to preside as vice-chairman of
the Rajya Sabha. He was Chairman of Parliament’s Standing Committee on Industry. He
was a member of the Executive Board of the UNESCO, and was President, Shri Ramana
Kendra, New Delhi, for more than a decade.\n--- 第11页 ---\nCONTENTS
Preface to First Edition v
Preface to Second Edition viii
Foreword ix
Contents xi
List of Poems in Praise of Sri Ramana xxi
List of Pictures xxii
Sri Ramana Maharshi – A Life Sketch 1-12
REMINISCENCES
1. Dr.Paul Brunton was a British journalist whose writings made Sri
Ramana known the world over. ... ... ... 13
2. Sadhu Ekarasa (Dr.G.H.Mees, M.A., LL.D.) was a Dutch scholar. 24
3. Prof. Banning Richardson, M.A. (Hons.) (Cantab.), A.B.
(Princeton) was Professor of English Literature. ... ... 27
4. Justice K.Sundaram Chettiar, B.A., B.L., was High Court Judge,
Madras. ... ... ... 27
5. Manu Subedar was a member of the Central Legislative Assembly. 28
6. William S.Spaulding (Jr.) was from New York City. ... 29
7. Grant Duff (Douglas Ainslie) was a scholar and a senior government
official at Madras. ... ... ... 29
8. Dilip Kumar Roy belonged to Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry.
He authored many books and was also a musician. ... ... 31
9. B.Sanjiva Rao, B.A. (Cantab.) belonged to the pre-Independence
Indian Educational Service. ... ... ... 33
10. Justice N.Chandrasekhara Aiyar was High Court Judge, Madras. 34
11. Eleanor Pauline Noye was from California. ... ... 35
12. K.S.Venkataramani, M.A., B.L., was Adviser to the former Alwar
State (Rajasthan). ... ... ... 37
13. Dr. C. Kunhan Raja was Director of the Adyar Library,
Theosophical Society, Madras. ... ... ... 37
14. Madan Mohan Varma was Chairman, Rajasthan Public Service
Commission, Jaipur. ... ... ... 39
15. Ella Maillart was a Swiss travel writer and photographer. ... 40
16. Swami Siddheswarananda was Head, Ramakrishna Mission, Paris. 41\n--- 第12页 ---\nxii Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
17. T.M.Krishnaswami Aiyar, B.A., B.L., was Chief Justice of the
former Travancore State (Kerala). ... ... ... 43
18. K.S.Ramaswami Sastri, B.A., B.L., was Chief Justice of the
former Pudukottah State (Tamil Nadu). ... ... ... 43
19. Dr. K.C.Varadachari, M.A., Ph.D., was a scholar based in Tirupati. 44
20. Giridhari Lal belonged to Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry. 45
21. Prof. B.L.Atreya, M.A., D.Litt., was Head, Dept. of Philosophy
and Psychology, Benaras Hindu University. ... ... 46
22. Oliver Lacombe was L’Attache Culturel, Consulat General de
France, Calcutta. ... ... ... 47
23. Prof. Syed M.Hafiz, M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt., was Head, Dept. of
Philosophy, Allahabad University. ... ... ... 47
24. A.S.Panchapagesa Ayyar belonged to the former Indian Civil
Service. ... ... ... 49
25. Prof. T.M.P. Mahadevan, M.A.,Ph.D., was Head, Dept. of
Philosophy, Madras University. ... ... ... 51
26. Duncan Greenlees, M.A. (Oxon.), was a British scholar and a
Theosophist. ... ... ... 52
27. H.Ghosh, M.A., was Principal, Holkar College, Indore (Madhya
Pradesh). ... ... ... 57
28. C.S.Bagi, M.A., was Principal, Lingaraj College, Belgaum (Karnataka). 57
29. Rudra Raj Pande, M.A., was Principal, Tri-Chandra College, Nepal. 59
30. Prof. S.V.Ram, M.A., Ph.D., was Head, Dept. of Political Science,
Lucknow University. ... ... ... 61
31. Chinta Dikshitulu, B.A., L.T., was a distinguished Telugu author. 62
32. Harindranath Chattopadhyaya, a poet and artiste, was younger
brother of Sarojini Naidu, the Nightingale of India. ... ... 63
33. Dr. K. Subrahmanian was Professor of English, Central Institute
of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad. He was the Founder
President of Sri Ramana Kendram, Hyderabad. ... ... 65
34. N.Balarama Reddy, M.A., who authored My Reminiscences, lived
closely with Sri Ramana for over a decade. ... ... 69
35. A.Devaraja Mudaliar, who authored the well-known Day by Day
with Bhagavan and My Recollections of Bhagavan Sri Ramana, moved
closely with Sri Ramana for over a decade. ... ... 72
36. Maurice Frydman, a Polish Jew, was a research engineer who
worked in Karnataka. ... ... ... 75
37. S.S.Cohen, an Iraqi Jew, was a qualified accountant who adopted
Sri Ramanasramam as his home in 1936. He authored Guru Ramana
and Residual Reminiscences of Ramana. ... ... ... 78\n--- 第13页 ---\nContents xiii
38. K.K.Nambiar was Chief Engineer, Highways, Madras Presidency.
He authored The Guiding Presence of Sri Ramana.... ... 84
39. Suri Nagamma authored the famous Letters from Sri Raman-
asramam. ... ... ... 88
40. Arthur Osborne was an Oxford-educated Britisher. He was the
Founder-editor of The Mountain Path and authored five books on Sri
94
Ramana. ... ... ...
41. Prof.G.V.Subbaramayya taught English at a college in Nellore,
Andhra Pradesh. He was also a Telugu scholar. He authored Sri Ramana
102
Reminiscences. ... ... ...
42. Major A.W.Chadwick O.B.E., who became Sadhu Arunachala,
lived in the Ashram from 1935 to 1962. He authored A Sadhu’s
110
Reminiscences of Ramana Maharshi. ... ... ...
43. Prof. K.Swaminathan taught English at Presidency College, Madras.
117
He authored Sri Ramana – The Self Supreme and Ramana Maharshi.
44. Rangan (Velacheri Ranga Iyer) was a classmate of Sri Ramana. 122
45. M.Sivaprakasam Pillai, a Government employee, was the first
person to collect (in 1902) Sri Ramana’s teachings, later published as
125
the famous booklet Who am I? ... ... ...
46. Akhilandamma served food to Sri Ramana for forty years. 127
47. Sadhu Natanananda (Natesa Mudaliar) was a scholar who
129
authored many books on Sri Ramana. ... ... ...
48. Prof. N.R.Krishnamurti Aiyer taught physics for decades at the
134
American College, Madurai (Tamil Nadu). ... ...
49. Chalam (Gudipati Venkatachalam) was a famous Telugu writer
138
who authored Bhagavan Smritulu (Telugu). ... ...
143
50. Souris was daughter of Chalam (no.49). ... ...
146
51. Swami Madhavatirtha was a prolific Gujarati author. ...
150
52. Kunju Swami was Sri Ramana’s attendant from 1920 to 1932.
53. Muruganar (C.K.Subramania Iyer) was an outstanding Tamil
poet who sang nothing but glory of Sri Ramana in thousands of
154
poems. ... ... ...
54. T.P.Ramachandra Iyer was a laywer who acted as an interpreter
159
and also attended on Sri Ramana. ... ... ...
55. Chhaganlal V.Yogi, a Gujarati devotee, authored Sri Ramana Mahima
161
(Gujarati). ... ... ...
56. Lakshmana Swami of Gudur (Andhra Pradesh) was a sadhaka of
167
great merit. ... ... ...
57. Viswanatha Swami, a Tamil and Sanskrit scholar, translated many
171
Ashram publications into Tamil. ... ... ...\n--- 第14页 ---\nxiv Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
58. Ramanatha Brahmachari authored Ramana Strotra Anubhuti
(Tamil). ... ... ... 174
59. Mastan, a Muslim weaver, got drawn to Sri Ramana in 1914. 175
60. Echammal served food to Sri Ramana for decades. ... 176
61. Mudaliar Patti brought or sent food to Sri Ramana for 40 years,
176
without missing a day. ... ... ...
62. Krishna Bhikshu (Voruganti Krishnayya), a lawyer, authored
178
Ramana Leela (Telugu). ... ... ...
63. Lakshman Sarma authored Sri Ramana Paravidyopanishad
(Sanskrit). ... ... ... 183
64. Natesa Iyer served for long as a cook at the Ashram. ... 184
65. Sampurnamma served as a cook at the Ashram for decades. 186
66. Shantammal served as a cook at the Ashram for decades. ... 189
67. Sundaram (Sadhu Trivenigiri) was a spiritually-minded person
on the staff of the Ashram. ... ... ... 191
68. Subbalakshmi Ammal served for long as a cook at the Ashram. 193
69. Wolter A. Keers was a Dutch teacher and writer who lectured on
yoga and Advaita in Europe. ... ... ... 196
70. Annamalai Swami looked after construction projects at the Ashram
201
under direct supervision of Sri Ramana. ... ... ...
71. Mouni Sadhu (M. Sudouski), an Australian, authored the classic
205
In Days of Great Peace. ... ... ...
72. Kumar was a Bangalore-based journalist. ... ... 209
73. Swami Ranganathananda was till recently President of Sri
209
Ramakrishna Math, Belur Math, Howrah (West Bengal). ...
74. Swami Desikananda was a sannyasi of the Ramakrishna Order. 211
75. Pascaline Mallet, a French writer and seeker, authored Turn
Eastwards. ... ... ... 212
76. Gunturu Lakshmikantam was biographer of Ganapati Muni (no.91). 214
77. Ethel Merston, a French devotee, visited Sri Ramana in 1939. 215
78. A European Sadhak, who withheld his name ... ... 217
79. M.A. Piggot was the first English lady to visit Sri Ramana. 218
80. J.P. Vaswani is Head, Sadhu Vaswani Mission, Pune. ... 221
81. Swami Ramdas was the founder of Anandashram, Kanhangad,
Kerala. ... ... ... 223
82. Swami Tapovanam was the guru of Swami Chinmayananda. 224
83. Swami Chinmayananda was the founder of famous Chinmaya
Mission. ... ... ... 225\n--- 第15页 ---\nContents xv
84. Swami Muktananda was the founder of the well-known ashram
at Ganeshpuri near Mumbai. ... ... ... 226
85. Eliot C. Clark was a renowned American painter. ... 228
86. Swami Abhishiktananda was a Christian monk who lived as a
sannyasi. ... ... ... 229
87. Ramanadasa Sadananda (Seshagiri Iyer), a high school teacher,
authored Sri Ramana Dasakam (Tamil). ... ... 230
88. Dr. M. Anantanarayana Rao was a doctor at the Ashram
dispensary. ... ... ... 232
89. N. Ramachandra Rao authored Sri Ramana’s first biography in
Kannada. ... ... ... 234
90. Papaji (Hariwansh Lal Poonja) was a great Krishna bhakta who
relinquished his commissioned post in the army in favour of spiritual
attainments. ... ... ... 235
91. Ganapati Muni, Kavyakantha was a renowned Sanskrit scholar
and poet. ... ... ... 243
92. F.H. Humphreys, a police official, was the first European to meet
Sri Ramana in 1911. ... ... ... 245
93. Raghavachariar was Superintendent, Public Works Dept.,
Tiruvannamalai. ... ... ... 247
94. Manavasi V.Ramaswami Iyer was Supervisor, Public Works
Dept. Tiruvannamalai. ... ... ... 248
95. N.N.Rajan (N.Nataraja Iyer) was Station Master,
Tiruvannamalai. ... ... ... 249
96. Rama Varma Appan Tampuran was Maharaja of Cochin (Kerala). 251
97. Swami Rajeswarananda was a sannyasi of the Ramakrishna Order
and a life-long devotee of Sri Ramana. ... ... ... 252
98. Dr.Lt.Col. P.V. Karamchandani was District Medical Officer
of North Arcot district in Tamil Nadu. ... ... ... 253
99. Dr.T.N.Krishnaswami was a prolific photographer of Sri
Ramana. ... ... ... 256
100. R.Narayana Iyer was Sub-Registrar at Chetput, Tamil Nadu. 258
101. Suddhananda Bharati was a patriot who worked in the field of
Tamil literature and social reconstruction. He authored Ramana Vijayam
262
(1931), first biography of Sri Ramana in Tamil. ... ...
102. Ramanapadananda (V.S.Kuppuswami Aiyengar) was a
264
businessman. ... ... ...
103. Col.A.N.S.Murti’s mother’s hometown was Tiruvannamalai. 265
104. V. Kameswara Rao met Sri Ramana after revelation in a dream. 267\n--- 第16页 ---\nxvi Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
105. Prof. V.B.Athavale of Kirloskarvadi (Maharashtra) was a scholar
of the Gita. ... ... ... 269
106. G. Lakshmi Narasimham, B.L. has translated two of Sri Ramana’s
works into Telugu. ... ... ... 270
107. P.V.Sastri was a lawyer who came to Sri Ramana in the aftermath of
his son’s death. ... ... ... 272
108. M.M.Menon was from Palghat (Kerala). ... ... 274
109. N.V.Gunaji was an advocate from Belgaum (Karnakta). ... 275
110. Sister Lalita belonged to the Nilgiris (Tamil Nadu). ... 276
111. C.V.Subramania Iyer was Assistant Director, Public Health,
Madras. ... ... ... 276
112. Jagadeeswara Sastri, a distinguished Sanskrit scholar, was
associated with Sri Ramana for four decades. ... ... 278
113. Ramanananda Swarnagiri authored Crumbs from His Table. 280
114. Mercedes de Acosta, a Spanish American, was a Hollywood
socialite and a scriptwriter for films. ... ... ... 282
115. T.K.Sundaresa Iyer was a school teacher at Tiruvannamalai. He
served as an interpreter for English-speaking visitors at the Ashram and
authored At the Feet of Bhagavan. ... ... ... 285
116. T.R.Kanakammal authored Cherished Memories (original Tamil). 289
117. Srikrishnaprem was a British professor who became a Vaishnavite
sannyasi. ... ... ... 291
118. Prof. Pryns Hopkins was an American social psychologist. 292
119. Major-General V.N. Parameswaran Pillai was G.O.C. of the
former Travancore State (Kerala) Forces. ... ... 293
120. N.O.Mehta was a devotee from Gujarat. ... ... 295
121. Madhavi Ammal was the lady who wrested diksha from Sri Ramana. 296
122. Dr.Shankar Rao was a medical officer who attended on Sri Ramana. 297
123. Emmanual Sorensen (Sunya Baba) was a Danish devotee. 298
124. Lokamma was a kitchen worker at the Ashram. ... ... 299
125. Raja (V.Rajasubrahmania) Iyer was the first Ashram Postmaster. 300
126. Roda MacIver (nee Kamdin) hailed from a Parsee family of
Bombay. ... ... ... 301
127. Meenakshi was the wife of great poet Muruganar (no.53). 304
128. Nagaiah V. Chittoor was a legendary Telugu actor. ... 305
129. Padma Sitapati was daughter of Sri Ramana’s famous devotee Janaki
Matha of Tanjore (Tamil Nadu). ... ... ... 306\n--- 第17页 ---\nContents xvii
130. Swami Pranavananda (S.Narasimham) was uncle of India’s
former President S.Radhakrishnan. He authored many books on Sri
Ramana in Telugu. ... ... ... 307
131. T.R.Rajagopal was a devotee from Vijayawada (Andhra Pradesh). 308
132. Santanam Iyengar was a school Headmaster at Tanjore (Tamil Nadu). 309
133. Prof. Sista Subba Rao taught English at the Hindu College,
Machilipatnam (Andhra Pradesh). ... ... ... 309
134. Mahapatra Dave was a teacher at the Gujarati School, Secundrabad
(Andhra Pradesh). ... ... ... 312
135. Subbalakshmi was the wife of Dr. M.R.Krishnamurthi Iyer (no.155). 315
136. Vajreswari was the daughter of Ganapati Muni (no.91). ... 316
137. Kundalmal A. Mahatani was a devotee from Karachi (now in
Pakistan). ... ... ... 316
138. Santha Rangachary was a career journalist. ... ... 317
139. T.R.A.Narayana was manager in a large British firm in Madras. 320
140. K.R.K.Murthi, B.E. (Elec.) was Chief Electrical Engineer, Electricity
Dept., Government of Andhra Pradesh. ... ... ... 323
141. Srimat Puragra Parampanthi, a renowned Swami of his time, has
authored many books. ... ... ... 326
142. K.Arunachalam was a Gandhian social worker. ... 327
143. Panthulu Lakshmi Narayana Sastri was a Sanskrit and Telugu
scholar. ... ... ... 329
144. B.N.Datar was a famous philosopher based in Hubli (Karnataka). 331
145. Y.N. (alias Bhaurao) Athavale was one of the few Maharashtrian
devotees of Sri Ramana. ... ... ... 333
146. Dr. Haribhai M.Adalja was a disciple of Swami Madhavatirtha
(no. 51). ... ... ... 334
147. Sadhu Bramanian, earlier Dr. R.Subramanian, was Director of Public
Health, Madras. ... ... ... 335
148. M.V.Krishnan was the son of Munagala S.Venkataramiah who
compiled the well-known volume Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi. 336
149. N.Ponniah, who lived in Malaysia, visited Sri Ramana in 1948. 337
150. Swami Satyananda was Sri Ramana’s attendant. ... 338
151. Henri Hartung was a Swiss devotee. ... ... 339
152. Swami Chidbhavananda was Head, Sri Ramakrishna Ashram,
Ootacamund, 1926-40. ... ... ... 340
153. C.R.Pattabhi Raman was a Central Government minister. 342\n--- 第18页 ---\nxviii Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
154. Maha Krishna Swami established ‘Bhagavan Sri Ramana
Ashramam’ in Brazil. ... ... ... 343
155. Dr.M.R.Krishnamurthi Iyer was the first doctor at the Ashram
dispensary. ... ... ... 344
156. Prof. Shiva Mohan Lal was Head, Dept. of Philosophy, Osmania
University, Hyderabad. ... ... ... 345
157. Prabhakar was the author of Prapatti Satakam (Sanskrit). 348
158. Lakshmi Ranganadham was referred to as ‘Our Lakshmi’ by Sri
Ramana. ... ... ... 349
159. Ramaswami Pillai was a long-standing devotee of Sri Ramana. 350
160. Morarji Desai was Prime Minister of India. ... ... 352
161. M.V. Ramanachalam’s father was a boyhood friend of Sri Ramana. 353
162. Swami Ramanananda Saraswati (T.N.Venkataraman) was
President of Ramanasramam for over 40 years. ... ... 355
163. Robert Adams, an American, was with Sri Ramana for three years –
1947-50. ... ... ... 358
164. Ramakrishna Madhavpeddi, an attorney at Madras High Court,
visited Sri Ramana in 1948. ... ... ... 361
165. M.G. Shanmukam’s Tamil biography of Sri Ramana was published
in 1937. ... ... ... 362
166. Taleyarkhan, Firoza, born in Hyderabad, belonged to an affluent
Parsi family. ... ... ... 364
167. Shankarlal Banker was a close associate of Mahatma Gandhi. 366
168. K. Venkatarathnam was an attendant of Sri Ramana from 1944 till
the mahanirvana. ... ... ... 368
169. Swami Lakshman Joo Raina was pre-eminent exponent of
Kashmir Saivism. ... ... ... 370
170. Swami Rama is the author of the well-known Living with Himalayan
Masters. ... ... ... 371
171. Swami Paramahansa Yogananda is the author of the well-known
Autobiography of a Yogi. ... ... ... 372
172. Swami Tapasananda was president of Ramakrishna Mission,
Madras, for two decades. ... ... ... 374
173. J.C. Molony, I.C.S., was a district collector in Madras Presidency. 375
174. T.S. Anantha Murthy, a judge at Bangalore, authored Life and
Teachings of Sri Ramana Maharshi. ... ... ... 376
175. Suzanne Alexandra from Paris, met Sri Ramana in 1936. 377
176. The anonymous chronicler, a science student, met Sri Ramana in
1946. ... ... ... 379\n--- 第19页 ---\nContents xix
177. P.L.N. Sharma, a Gandhian, met Sri Ramana in 1932. ... 381
178. B.C. Sengupta, M.A., B.L., was principal of a college in Bengal. 382
179. C.R. Rajamani first visited Sri Ramana in early 1940’s. ... 384
180. Rajalakshmi’s grandmother was younger sister of Echammal
386
(no. 60). ... ... ...
181. Sab Jan (M. Abdul Wahab) was Sri Ramana’s classmate at
Madurai. ... ... ... 387
182. Dhiruben Patel of Bombay got Sri Ramana’s grace in 1940’s. 388
183. K.Vithoba Kamath, a Gandhian, visited Sri Ramana in 1946. 390
184. T.V. Kapali Sastri, a born scholar, met Sri Ramana in 1911-2. 391
185. Atmakuri Govindacharyulu, an Andhra, first visited the Ashram
in 1944-5. ... ... ... 393
186. Keerai Patti was the first lady to supply food to Sri Ramana on a
regular basis. ... ... ... 394
187. Padma from Madras was a devotee of Sri Ramana. ... 395
188. D.S. Sastri was an official of the then Imperial Bank of India. 395
189. Sankarananda, an Andhra, was a police officer. ... 397
190. Seshadri Sastrigal served in the dining hall of the Ashram. 397
191. M.S. Nagarajan, a staunch devotee, belonged to Polur (District
Tiruvannamalai). ... ... ... 398
192. C. Rajagopalachari was Governor-General of India. ... 399
193. T.S. Narayanaswami saw Sri Ramana two months before the
mahanirvana. ... ... ... 400
194. Uma Devi (Wanda Dynowska), a Pole, wrote Teachings of Sri
Ramana Maharshi. ... ... ... 401
195. Prof. D. Gurumurthi came to see Sri Ramana during his last days. 401
196. Gouriammal, an earnest devotee, had built her house near the
Ashram. ... ... ... 402
197. Krishnaswami came to Sri Ramana in 1936 and was his attendant till
the mahanirvana. ... ... ... 403
198. Thelma Rappold, an American was with Sri Ramana during
1947-50. ... ... ... 404
199. Apa B. Pant was India’s High Commissioner in U.K. ... 405
200. Vaikuntavasar was an attendant of Sri Ramana and later a trustee of
the Ashram. ... ... ... 406
201. Saroja Krishnan’s uncle Rajagopala Iyer had witnessed the will
executed by Sri Ramana in 1938. ... ... ... 406
202. Shanti (pseudonym) visited Sri Ramana in 1943. ... ... 408\n--- 第20页 ---\nxx Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Annexures
I Mountain Arunachala and Temple of Arunachaleswara in
Tiruvannamalai ... ... ... 410
II Karthikai Deepam or Deepam Festival ... ... 411
III The Periapuranam’s Story of Great Siva Bhakta –
Kannappan Naayanaar ... ... ... 412
IV The Cow Lakshmi ... ... ...
414
V Dakshinamurthi – The Great Silent Guru, an Incarnation
of Lord Siva ... ... ... 415
Glossary of Non-English Words and Important
Sanskrit and Tamil Books Referred to in the Text ... 417
References of the Sources of Material Used ... ... 427
Alphabetical List of Contributors ... ... ... 434
Accolades Showered upon Sri Ramana ... ... 438
Index ... ... ... 445\n--- 第21页 ---\nLIST OF POEMS IN PRAISE
OF SRI RAMANA
1. Heart’s Homage to Sri Ramana by Sadhu Ekarasa ... 26
2. With Sri Ramana of Arunachala by Grant Duff ... 30
3. To Sri Ramana Maharshi by Dilip Kumar Roy ... 32
4. Sri Maharshi – The Alchemist by Giridhari Lal ... 46
5. Sri Arunachala Ramana by Duncan Greenlees ... 56
6. The Leonine Power by C.S. Bagi ... 59
7. The Thrice Marvellous Sri Ramana and A Lyric to
Sri Ramana by Harindranath Chattopadhyaya ... 63
8. Two extracts from the poems by Maurice Frydman ... 77
9. An extract from the poems by Arthur Osborne ... 101
10. Surrender and Will You Let Me Go? by A.W.Chadwick ... 115
11. Sri Ramana – the Self Supreme by K. Swaminathan ... 121
12. A Stanza in Maharshi’s Praise by Swami Desikananda ... 212
13. My Beloved Bhagavan by Swami Ramdas ... 224
14. Who am I? by Robert Adams ... 360\n--- 第22页 ---\nLIST OF PICTURES
(18 pictures are at the end)
1. Two views of mountain Arunachala, known to be Lord Siva
Himself, who drew Sri Ramana to Tiruvannamalai.
2. Ancient Siva temple which sheltered Sri Ramana for many months
after he reported arrival in 1896 to his Father Lord Siva in the
temple.
3. (i) Virupaksha cave on mountain Arunachala which was Sri
Ramana’s abode from 1899 to 1916.
(ii) Samadhi of Virupakshadeva inside the cave.
4. (i) Front room in Virupaksha cave.
(ii) Skandasram on mountain Arunachala which was Sri Ramana’s
abode from 1916 to 1922.
5. Sri Ramana with large and penetrating eyes – Earliest available
photo.
6. Sri Ramana exuding peace and shakti in his late 1930’s.
7. Sri Ramana on the couch in the old hall where devotees benefited
from his presence for more than 20 years.
8. Sri Ramana – Detachment incarnate.
9. Blissful radiance of Sri Ramana – Two images.
10. Sri Ramana on his afternoon stroll.
11. Sri Ramana rests on the lap of his beloved Arunachala.
12. Sri Ramana showers affection on the Ashram’s cow.
13. Swami Paramahana Yogananda and Paul Brunton with Sri
Ramana.
14. Entrance to the shrines of Sri Ramana and the Mother at Sri
Ramanasramam.
15. Ramaneswaralingam, samadhi shrine of Sri Ramana.
16. Matrubhuteswaralingam, samadhi shrine of the Mother.
17. Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Jamana Lal Bajaj and devotees at the
Ashram with Sri Ramana.
18. Sri Ramana on his seat in the Jubilee Hall.\n--- 第23页 ---\nSRI RAMANA MAHARSHI –
A LIFE SKETCH
Birth and Early Years
Venkataraman (later Sri Ramana Maharshi) was born on
December 30, 1879 at Tiruchuzhi, a small village in Tamil Nadu, some
thirty miles off Madurai and eighteen miles from Virudhunagar, the nearest
railway station. Venkataraman’s mother Alagamma was a pious, devoted
person and his father Sundaram Ayyar was a pleader, who practised
mostly before the local magistrate. Venkataraman had a brother, two
years his senior. His other brother and his sister were both younger to
him by a few years. It was a happy, well-to-do middle class family.
When Venkataraman was twelve, Sundaram Ayyar died and the
family was broken up. He and his elder brother were sent to live with
their paternal uncle, Subbier, who had a house in Madurai. Here,
Venkataraman first attended the Scott’s Middle School and then joined
the American Mission High School for his ninth standard. At school, his
one asset was an amazingly retentive memory, which enabled him to
repeat a lesson after hearing it just once.
Endowed with a stronger constitution than most of his classmates
and with a spirit of independence that marked him off from other students,
Venkatraman found school games and outdoor life more congenial than
studies and reading books.
In his boyhood years Venkataraman was prone to abnormally
deep sleep. Speaking about it in later years he said: “The boys didn’t
dare to touch me when I was awake, but if they had any grudge against
me they would come when I was asleep, carry me wherever they liked,
beat me, paint my face with charcoal and then put me back, and I would
know nothing how it happened until they told me next morning.”
The Origin of his Awakening
In November 1895, an elderly relation spoke to Venkataraman
about his visit to Arunachala, the sacred hill in Tiruvannamalai,\n--- 第24页 ---\n2 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Tamil Nadu. The word ‘Arunachala’ somehow had evoked in him since
childhood an inexplicable awe and love. He enquired from the relative
the whereabouts of Arunachala and ever afterwards found himself haunted
by its thoughts.1
A little later, a copy of the Periapuranam fell into Venkata-
raman’s hands. This purana contains stories of sixty-three Tamil saints
who could secure Lord Siva’s grace by their exemplary devotion. As
Venkataraman read the book, he was overwhelmed with ecstatic wonder
that such faith, such love and such divine fervour was at all possible.The
tales of renunciation leading to Divine union filled him with awe and
admiration. Something greater than all dream lands, was proclaimed real
and possible in the book.2
From that time onwards, the spiritual current of awareness began
to waken up in the young boy. This grew ever stronger with the passage
of time and after a few months, sometime in the middle of July 1896,
when he was just sixteen and a half years old, Venkataraman realised
the Self in a miraculous manner. Years later, he described the event himself
in the following words:
About six weeks before I left Madurai for good, a great change
took place in my life. It was quite sudden. I was sitting alone in a room in
my uncle’s house, when a sudden fear of death overtook me. There was
nothing in my state of health to account for it. I just felt, ‘I am going to
die’ and began thinking about it. The fear of death drove my mind inwards
and I said to myself mentally, ‘Now that death has come; what does it
mean? What is it that is dying? Only this body dies.’ And at once I
dramatised the occurrence of death. I held my breath and kept my lips
tightly closed and said to myself, ‘This body is dead. It will be carried to
the cremation ground and reduced to ashes. But with the death of this
body am I dead? Is this body ‘I’? I am the spirit transcending the body.
That means I am the deathless atman.’
What happened next is difficult to comprehend, though easy to
describe. Venkataraman seemed to fall into a profound conscious trance
wherein he became merged into the very source of selfhood, the very
essence of Being. He quite clearly perceived and imbibed the truth that
the body was a thing apart from the atman that remained untouched by
death.
Venkataraman emerged from this amazing experience an utterly
changed person. He lost interest in studies, sports, friends and so on. His
chief interest now centered in the sublime consciousness of the true Self,\n--- 第25页 ---\nSri Ramana Maharshi – A Life Sketch
which he had found so unexpectedly. He enjoyed an inward serenity and
a spiritual strength, which never left him.
The new mode of consciousness transformed Venkataraman’s
sense of values and his habits. Things he esteemed earlier had now lost
their appeal. In his words: “Another change that came over me was that
I no longer had any likes or dislikes with regard to food. Whatever was
given to me, tasty or insipid, I would swallow with total indifference.”
Leaving the House for Arunachala
Venkataraman’s uncle and elder brother became critical of his
changed mode of life, which seemed to them utterly impractical. Then
came the tangible crisis on August 29, 1896. Venkataraman was then
studying in tenth standard, preparing for his public examination. His
teacher had given him an exercise in English grammar to be written
three times. He copied it out twice and was about to do so for the third
time when the futility of it struck him so forcibly that he pushed the
papers away and, sitting cross-legged, abandoned himself to meditation.
His elder brother who was watching this, scolded him for behaving like a
yogi while still staying in the family and pretending to study. Such remarks
had been made constantly during the last few weeks, and had gone
unnoticed. But this time they went home. “Yes”, thought Venkataraman,
“What business have I here?” And immediately came the thought of
Arunachala that had caused such a thrill in him a few months ago. He
decided then and there to discover the fabulous and legendary Arunachala
of his dreams.
Venkataraman knew that it was necessary to use some guile
because his family would never otherwise let him go. So he told his
brother that he had to attend a special class at the school. Unintentionally
providing him with funds for the journey, his brother said, “Take five
rupees from the box and pay my college fees.” Venkataraman took only
three rupees, no more than what he thought was necessary for reaching
Tiruvannamalai. In the note he left (which fortunately is preserved), he
wrote in Tamil:
“I have set out in quest of my Father in accordance with His
command. It is on a virtuous enterprise that ‘this’ has embarked, therefore
let none grieve over this act and let no money be spent in search of
‘this’. Your college fees have not been paid. Two rupees are enclosed.”
The note ended with the word ‘Thus’, and a dash -- in place of
his signature.\n--- 第26页 ---\n4 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
It is significant that the opening sentence in the note began with
‘I’, but later Venkataraman used ‘this’ in reference to himself.Thus, what
left Madurai for Tiruvannamalai was not the spirit, which had already got
absorbed in the Lord, but the body, now viewed as distinct from the
spirit. The personality which began with ‘I’, got merged into ‘this’, and at
the end there was no person left to sign; hence the note remained
unsigned.3 The note made it clear that the writer was driven by a Divine
command, which had to be obeyed.
Reaching Tiruvannamalai on the early morning of September 1,
1896, after a series of trials and tribulations, Venkataraman went straight
to the great Arunachaleswara temple4 and stood before his Father. His
cup of bliss was now full to the brim. It was the journey’s end, and his
homecoming. [For a view of the temple, see photograph no. 2 in the
book.]
Tranced Years and Fresh Moorings
Coming out of the temple, the youth got his head shaven and
threw away all his belongings and clothes except for a strip he tore off
his dhoti to serve as a loincloth. Thus renouncing everything, he went
back to the temple complex and got immersed in the Bliss of Being,
sitting motionless, day after day, night after night.
One Seshadri Swami, a learned ascetic of high spiritual attain-
ment, took it upon himself to look after Brahmana Swami, as Venkata-
raman began to be called. Some schoolboys started throwing stones at
him as they were intrigued to see someone not much older than themselves
sitting like a statue. And as one of them put it later, he wanted to find out
whether he was real or not. To avoid the situation, Brahmana Swami
took shelter in the Patala Lingam, an underground small Siva shrine within
the enormous temple complex, where ants and vermin fed on his flesh
during the weeks he spent there. But the young Swami, absorbed in bliss,
remained unmoved.
When some devotees discovered the Swami in the vault, oblivious
of the dreadful condition he was in, with worm-infested wounds and
oozing pus, they removed him to a nearby shrine within the temple
complex. From then on, he continued to move within the complex to
various other shrines and groves away from curious onlookers. In all
these places, he was looked after by mendicants, devotees from the
town, temple functionaries and others. He continued to remain absorbed\n--- 第27页 ---\nSri Ramana Maharshi – A Life Sketch 5
in the Self and was virtually dead to the world: he had to be shaken by
the shoulders before he would accept water or food, which some
devotees brought for him.
Years later, the Maharshi recalled how he had been forcibly
administered a bath by a motherly devotee, the first in four months after
his arrival in Tiruvannamalai. It was twelve months later that another
such devotee gave him a second bath. Likewise, his hair remained uncut
and his face unshaven for some eighteen months. He told Suri Nagamma
(no. 39): “The hair had got matted and woven like a basket. Small stones
and dust had settled in it and the head used to feel heavy. I had long nails
and a frightful appearance. When some people pressed me to have a
shave, I yielded. When my head was shaven clean, I began to wonder
whether I had a head or not, I felt so light.”
In February 1897, the young Swami was removed to the
Gurumurtam – a math, some distance away from the town, where he
lived for about nineteen months. He continued to remain Self-absorbed
and was looked after mainly by a sadhu named Uddandi Nayanar and
his friend Annamalai Thambiran. Pilgrims and sightseers began to throng
the math and many would prostrate themselves before the Swami, some
with prayers for boons and some out of pure reverence.
As the crowd became large, a bamboo fence was put around the
Swami’s seat to prevent the public from touching him.There was no difficulty
about food, as several devotees wished to supply it regularly; the more
pressing need was to keep away the crowd of sightseers and visitors.
About this time, a Malayalee sadhu named Palaniswami, living
in great austerity, was devoting his life to the worship of Lord Vinayaka.
One day his friend Srinivasa Iyer told him, “Why do you spend your life
with this stone swami? There is a young swami in flesh and blood at the
Gurumurtam. He is steeped in tapas like the young Dhruva. If you go
there and attach yourself to him, your life will attain its purpose.” When
Palaniswami went to the math, he was stirred to his depths at the very
sight of the Swami and felt that he had discovered his saviour. He devoted
the remaining twenty-one years of his life serving the Maharshi as his
attendant.
As the Swami’s body was utterly neglected, it got weakened to
the limits of endurance. When he needed to go out, he had barely the
strength to rise. Many times it so happened that he would raise himself
by a few inches and then sink back again.\n--- 第28页 ---\n6 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
One Venkatarama Iyer, head accountant in a government office
in the town, used to visit the Swami everyday before going to his work.
One day, he placed before him a sheet of paper and a pencil and besought
him to write his name and place of origin. When the Swami made no
response to his pleading, he declared that he would neither eat nor go to
office till he received the desired information. Then Sri Ramana wrote in
English ‘Venkataraman, Tiruchuzhi’. His knowledge of English came as
a surprise.
Search for the Lost Boy and Mother’s Visit
In the meantime, Venkataraman’s relatives were making anxious
enquiries and searches at various places, but he could not be traced.
Annamalai Thambiran (mentioned in the second para of the previous
page), who had learnt the young Swami’s name and native place at the
math, happened to visit Madurai. He spoke to one of Venkataraman’s
family friends about the well-known young saint at Tiruvannamalai who
belonged to Tiruchuzhi. Immediately after getting this information,
Venkataraman’s uncle set off for Tiruvannamalai. He pleaded in vain for
the Swami’s return and left for Madurai empty-handed.
After sometime, the young Swami began to reside at the
Pavalakunru shrine on the Arunachala hill, where also he would sit as
before, immersed in the Bliss of Being. It was here that mother Alagamma
came to take back her son, whom she recognised despite his wasted
body and matted hair. With a mother’s love and concern, she lamented
over his condition and pressed him to go back with her, but he sat unmoved
despite her repeated entreaties. One day, pouring out her grief to the
devotees around him, she beseeched them to intervene. Seized by the
mother’s plight, one of them told the Swami, “Your mother is weeping
and praying; at least give her an answer. The Swami need not break his
vow of silence, but he could certainly write what he has to say.”
Venkataraman took a pencil and wrote in Tamil: “The Ordainer
controls the fate of souls in accordance with their prarabdha-karma.5
Whatever is destined not to happen will not happen, try hard as you may.
Whatever is destined to happen will happen, do what you may to prevent
it.This is certain. The best course, therefore, is to remain silent.”
The last sentence applied to the mother, who was asking what
could not be granted. It applies to people in general in the sense that ‘it is
no use kicking against the pricks,’ opposing the destiny that cannot be\n--- 第29页 ---\nSri Ramana Maharshi – A Life Sketch 7
altered. But it does not mean that utmost sincere efforts to succeed are
not made. The man who says, “Everything is predestined, therefore I
need make no effort”, is indulging in the wrong and tricky assumption
that he knows what is predestined. The mother returned home and the
Swami remained absorbed in the Self, as before.
The Swami Moves to Virupaksha Cave
Early in 1899, the young ascetic, accompanied by his attendant
Palaniswami took up his residence in the Virupaksha Cave, named after
the thirteenth century saint Virupakshadeva, whose remains lie buried
there.The cave is curiously shaped to resemble the sacred monosyllable
OM, the tomb being in the inner recess. He stayed in this cave for about
seventeen years. [See photograph nos. 3(i) & (ii) and 4 (i) in the book.]
Here also the young Swami maintained silence for the first few
years. His radiance had already drawn a group of devotees around him
and an ashram had come into being. He occasionally wrote out instructions
and explanations for his disciples, but his silence did not impede their
training because his most effective way of imparting instruction was
through the unspoken word. The penetrating silence became the hallmark
of the young sage, as indicated on pages mentioned under the head
‘Silence of M’ in Index.
Some Early Visitors
Sivaprakasam Pillai (no. 45), an officer in the Revenue
Department and an intellectual, heard of the young Swami residing on
the hill. At his very first visit in 1902, he was captivated by the Swami’s
aura and became his life-long devotee. As the Swami was maintaining
silence he answered fourteen questions of Pillai by writing on a slate.
These were later expanded and arranged in a book form Who am I?
This is perhaps the most widely appreciated prose exposition of the
Maharshi’s philosophy.
Ganapati Muni (no. 91), a renowned Sanskrit scholar and poet,
was another devotee who visited the Swami from 1903 onwards and
accepted him as his guru in 1907. It was the grateful Muni who named
the Swami as Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi, and sang of him as an
incarnation of Subrahmanya, son of Lord Siva. The Maharishi’s answers
to the questions put by the Muni and his disciples, largely constitute the
well-known work Ramana Gita. The most quoted sloka of this book
(II. 2) tells us: In the interior of the Heart-Cave [right hand side of the\n--- 第30页 ---\n8 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
chest, not left] Brahman alone shines in the form of atman. Enter deep
into the Heart with a questioning mind, or by diving deep within, or with
breath under check, and abide in the atman.
The earliest Western seeker to come under the Swami’s influence
(in 1911) was F.H. Humphreys (no. 92). When he asked how he could
help the world, Sri Ramana replied, “Help yourself, and you will help the
world. You are not different from the world, nor is the world different
from you.”
The number of devotees increased greatly over a period of time.
The text provides a record of experiences of a large number of such of
those devotees who felt inclined to write or communicate through others.
Consideration for the Down-trodden and Lowly
The text contains many instances of Sri Ramana’s concern for
the underprivileged. One such incident was narrated by Sri Ramana himself
many years after the event to Suri Nagamma: When we were on the hill,
at midday some women of the lowest caste, who carried heavy loads of
grass on their heads, would frantically search for water to quench thirst
and relieve exhaustion. But as they were not permitted to go near the
well, I would wait near the well and pour water in the cup of their hands,
which they drank with great satisfaction. They had to reach home quickly
to look after their children, and used to come to us with hope and
expectation. (Pp. 93-4.)
For more incidents of the Maharshi’s consideration for the
depressed, see Index - ‘M’s concern for the underprivileged.’
Skandasram and Sri Ramanasramam
In 1916, as the number of resident devotees increased, Sri
Ramana shifted to the more commodious Skandasram, named so as it
was built through Herculean efforts of his staunch devotee Kandaswami.
[See photograph no. 4(ii) in the book.]
After the death of his mother in 1922 (who had come to stay
with her ascetic son six years before and had got nirvana in his hands),
her body was laid to rest at the foot of the Arunachala hill. The present
Ashram, named Sri Ramanasramam, has developed around the mother’s
samadhi called Matrubhuteswara, God in the form of Mother. [See
photograph nos.14&16 in the book.]
The Ashram, which began with a single thatched shed over the
mother’s samadhi, has developed into a fairly large complex ofbuildings,\n--- 第31页 ---\nSri Ramana Maharshi – A Life Sketch 9
the most important of which, according to many sadhakas, is the Old
Hall where Sri Ramana spent most of his living time for over twenty
years on a couch gifted by a devotee.6 [See photograph no.7 of Sri Ramana
on the couch in the hall.] The shrine over Sri Ramana’s samadhi, which
has a large, bright, and airy meditation hall attached to it, regularly draws
a large number of devotees and visitors throughout the year. [See
photograph no. 15 in the book.]
After Sri Ramana came down to live in the Ashram at the foot
of the hill, he made it clear, though not explicitly, that giving darshan and
communicating with people through silence or brief messages of
deliverance was his sole goal in life. A large number of seekers in various
stages of spiritual evolution came to him and found peace, clarity and
strength of mind in his presence, as detailed in the text.
Some Characteristics and Approach of Sri Ramana
Among the qualities that endeared Sri Ramana to thousands,
was his soulabhya – easy accessiblility. He sacrificed all privacy of
time and sat in the hall day in and day out, and even slept in the presence
of all. He did everything possible to make himself available to the
devotees. With advancing age, the Ashram management thought of some
rest for him after lunch by closing the doors of the hall for two hours.
When Sri Ramana learnt about it, he sat outside the hall after lunch
saying: “To see me, people come from different parts of the world. They
may have some other urgent work. The management is welcome to
close the doors but I am free to meet the visitors outside.” It took a lot of
persuasion to make him relent.7
Equally charming was his sahajata – the utter normality of
behaviour. His manners were so natural that the newcomer immediately
felt at ease with him. By a single glance, a nod of the head or by a simple
enquiry from him, the visitor felt that Sri Ramana was his very own and
that he cared for him. He was extremely humble and unassuming. There
was no pontifical solemnity in his expositions; on the contrary, his speech
was lively. When a devotee asked why his prayers were not being
answered, Sri Ramana laughingly said, “If they were, you might stop
praying.”
Much could be written about the way Sri Ramana practised
samatva – equality. In his presence all were alike: high or low, rich or
poor, man or woman, child or adult, human or animal. He would never
tolerate any consideration or attention being shown to him more than to\n--- 第32页 ---\n10 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
any other in the Ashram. Last two paras at p. 74 show how Sri Ramana
opposed any physical concession to himself. If some little excess was
served to him of any dish or any delicacy above the quantity served to
others, he would chide whoever was responsible. Refer Index under the
head ‘Samatva’ for some incidents.
Sri Ramana had compassion for all species of life. His love for
plants gets illustrated at pp.179 and 291. The text contains many episodes
of his love for animals. Reference to these can be found in Index under
the head ‘Animals and birds, M’s attitude towards’.
Sri Ramana taught the Ashram inmates more by example than
precept. This gets illustrated in the last para at p. 204.
Sri Ramana stressed that the path to peace is through service,
and he himself set an example in the daily life at the Ashram. He would
diligently correct manuscripts and proofs, cut vegetables, clean grain,
shell nuts, stitch leaf-plates and assist in cooking, thus exemplifying the
dignity of labour and charm of simplicity. Karma was, for him, not some
special ritualistic action, but the daily tasks that are our common lot.
(Refer last two paras at page 368.)
Sri Ramana’s teachings were mirrored to perfection in his life.
He declared that to abide in the Self was the highest attainment, and it
was in this State Transcendent that one found him at all times. He had
the characteristics of a jivanmukta – emancipated, while yet in the
physical body. According to the Yoga Vasistha, to such a person:
“Pleasures do not delight, pains do not distress. He does not work to get
anything for himself. There is nothing which he has to achieve. He is full
of mercy and magnanimity. He rests unagitated in Supreme Bliss.”
Sri Ramana always laid stress on maunam – the silence, which
is not meant to be negation of activity. It is something very positive. It is
Supreme Peace, immutable like a rock that supports all activities, all
movements. Answering the puzzlement of her Western friends about the
‘inactivity’ of Sri Ramana, Ella Maillart writes: Having identified ourselves
with our bodies, we are convinced that one has got to be visibly active.
We forget that inactivity is the basis of its corollary activity; that the
useful wheel could not exist or move without a motionless base. (P. 40.)
Sri Ramana never consciously did anything to make an impact
or to carve out a niche for himself in the annals of history. He shunned
all publicity and image building. He had successfully effaced himself.
Paul Brunton, a British journalist, who lived near Sri Ramana for a few\n--- 第33页 ---\nSri Ramana Maharshi – A Life Sketch 11
weeks in 1930, writes: “I like him greatly because he is so simple and
modest, when an atmosphere of authentic greatness lies so palpably
around him; and also because he is so totally without any traces of
pretension and he strongly resists every effort to canonize him during
his lifetime.” (P. 18.)
Sri Ramana never gave discourses, much less went on lecture-
tours. After leaving home, he lived continuously for fifty-four years on or
near the Arunachala hill. When people went to him and put questions, he
answered them in his own simple way, devoid of solemn discourses.
Sri Ramana was much against miracles. He once said, “A
magician deludes others by his tricks, but he himself is never deluded. A
siddha who manifests his siddhis is inferior to the magician as he is
deceiving others as much as himself.” The ‘miracles’, which used to
happen from time to time looked like coincidences, and if brought to Sri
Ramana’s attention he would just laugh them away. Sri Ramana would
use the term ‘Automatic Divine Action’ for the ‘miracles’ and he made
the devotee believe that he had no part to play in the matter. For a list of
‘miracles’, refer Index under the head ‘Miracles of M - Episodes’.
Sri Ramana did not found a new cult or religion. He did not insist
on compliance with any established religious mode, ritual or line of conduct.
He emphasized the unity of Being and its accessibility through one’s own
efforts. According to him, the practical path to realization is atma-vichara,
the search for the Self, through constant and deep meditation on the
question Who am I? The approach is neither a religion nor a philosophy.
It entails no belief, no scholarship and no psychological doctrine.
In Sri Ramana’s view the trouble afflicts us due to the mistake
of limiting ourselves to the body. Constant self-questioning helps us to
understand and imbibe the true knowledge about our identity, which is
our Higher Self (atman), residing in the body.
Sri Ramana clarified that Who am I? is not a mantra to be
repeated. The purpose of asking the question is to withdraw the mind
from going outward and diving deep within one’s own Self. The monkey-
mind which is only a bundle of thoughts, would eventually vanish through
persistent and serious meditation on the question Who am I?
Sri Ramana maintained that we become unhappy because we
have failed to appreciate our true nature, which is happiness and which
is inborn in the True Self. The constant urge of all of us to secure happiness
in life is an unconscious search for our True Self.\n--- 第34页 ---\n12 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
The Last Days
Towards the end of 1948, a small nodule appeared above the left
elbow of Sri Ramana. Operations were performed but the malignant
tumour appeared again. The disease did not yield to any treatment.The
sage was quite unconcerned and remained supremely indifferent to his
suffering. Entries at no. 98, pp. 253-6 and no.122, pp. 297-8 by the doctors
who attended on Sri Ramana are significant in this regard.
Sri Ramana allowed himself to be operated to satisfy his devotees.
Major Chadwick (no. 42) writes: “The night before the last operation I
went to see Bhagavan and on my knees begged him not to have it. It was
obvious that it could do no good. Each time the tumour had grown bigger
and bigger. I prayed that this extra suffering was useless and that he
would let us be spared of the strain. But he refused, for, as he said, the
doctors had taken so much trouble, it would be shame to disappoint them
now. Bhagavan’s attitude had all along been to let everybody have a
chance; no one should be disappointed.”8
Sri Ramana had compassion for those who grieved over his
‘suffering’ and he sought to comfort them by referring to the basic truth,
the core of his message, that we are not the body. In his unique way he
would ask whether we ever retained the leaf-plate after the meal was
over.
The end came on April 14, 1950 at 8.47 p.m. At that very moment
a bright comet moved slowly across the sky, reached the summit of hill
Arunachala and disappeared high in the sky. The super soul reached its
source.
1. Refer annexure-I, p. 410 regarding Arunachala.
2. An abbreviated version of one of the famous stories from this book is at
annexure-III, p. 412.
3. Incidentally, after leaving Madurai, throughout his life Sri Ramana never
put his signature or name anywhere, not even on his will which was executed
in 1938.
4. Iswara manifested as Arunachala. Refer annexure-I, p. 410.
5. Destiny to be worked out in this life, resulting from the balance sheet of
actions in past lives.
6. Refer p.116, footnote no. 1 for the story of the couch.
7. Refer Index - ‘Soulabhya’ for episodes of accessibility.
8. A Sadhu’s Reminiscences of Ramana Maharshi by Sadhu Arunachala (A.W.
Chadwick ), Sri Ramanasramam, p. 78.\n--- 第35页 ---\n13
REMINISCENCES
The following provides a first-hand account of the
perceptions, experiences and feelings of persons who
had an opportunity of living, serving, interacting, or
just being in the presence of Sri Ramana Maharshi. In
the write-ups below, many speak of the Maharshi in
awed tones, which stir and overwhelm the reader. The
text also provides glimpses of the Maharshi’s divinity
and a peep into his philosophy.
1
Dr. Paul Brunton (1898-1981), a British journalist, attracted by
Indian mysticism first visited India in 1930. Author of eleven
books, he has emphasized the value and importance of the Self
within us. He is generally considered as having introduced
meditation to the West. He once wrote: “Sri Ramana was a spiritual
torch carried to the waiting souls in the West. I was only the
unimportant ‘link-boy’, the humble carrier.” The Paul Brunton
Philosophic Foundation, New York, has posthumously published
his post-1952 writings (the year when his last book The Spiritual
Crisis of Man was published), in 16 volumes. He was awarded a
doctorate in philosophy by the Roosevelt College, USA.
During his first visit, among many saints and yogis, Brunton
also met Sri Ramana. He stayed for a few weeks in an impro-
vised shelter very close to Sri Ramana’s Ashram.The number
of full-time devotees being limited at that time, Brunton had
ample opportunity of observing the Maharshi at close quarters
and interacting with him. He provides a dispassionate, illumi-
nating and intimate account of the Maharshi’s divinity and its\n--- 第36页 ---\n14 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
impact in his A Search in Secret India published from London in
1934. In his inimitable way he says:
There is something in this man which holds my attention as steel
filings are held by a magnet. I cannot turn my gaze away from him. I
become aware of a silent, resistless change, which is taking place within
my mind. One by one, the questions which I prepared with such meticulous
accuracy drop away. I know only that a steady river of quietness seems
to be flowing near me; that a great peace is penetrating the inner reaches
of my being, and that my thought-tortured brain is beginning to arrive at
some rest. I perceive with sudden clarity that intellect creates its own
problems and then makes itself miserable trying to solve them. This is
indeed a novel concept to enter the mind of one who has hitherto placed
such high value upon intellect.
I surrender myself to the steadily deepening sense of restfulness.
The passage of time now provokes no irritation, because the chains of
mind-made problems are being broken and thrown away. And then, little
by little, a question takes the field of consciousness. Does this man, the
Maharshi, emanate the perfume of spiritual peace as the flower emanates
fragrance from its petals? I begin to wonder whether by some radioactivity
of the soul, some unknown telepathic process, the stillness which invades
the troubled water of my soul really comes from him.The peace
overwhelms me.
The Maharshi turns and looks down into my face; I, in turn, gaze
expectantly up at him. I become aware of a mysterious change taking
place with great rapidity in my heart and mind. The old motives which
have lured me on begin to desert me. The urgent desires which have sent
my feet hither and thither vanish with incredible swiftness. The dislikes,
misunderstandings, coldness and selfishness which have marked my dealings
with many of my fellows collapse into the abyss of nothingness. An
untellable peace falls upon me and I know that there is nothing
further that I shall ask from life.
The Sage seems to carry something of great moment to me, yet I
cannot easily determine its precise nature. It is intangible, imponderable,
perhaps spiritual. Each time I think of him a peculiar sensation pierces me
and causes my heart to throb with vague but lofty expectations.
I look at the Sage. He sits there on Olympian heights and watches
the panorama of life as one apart. There is a mysterious property in this
man which differentiates him from all others I have met.
He remains mysteriously aloof even when surrounded by his own\n--- 第37页 ---\nPaul Brunton 15
devotees, men who have loved him and lived near him for years. Sometimes
I catch myself wishing that he would be a little more human, a little more
susceptible to what seems so normal to us.
Why is it that under his strange glance I invariably experience a
peculiar expectancy, as though some stupendous revelation will soon be
made to me? This man has freed himself from all problems, and no
woe can touch him.
The Sage seems to speak not as a philosopher, not as a pandit
trying to explain his own doctrine, but rather out of the depth of his
own heart.
I am not religious but I can no more resist the feeling of increasing
awe which begins to grip my mind than a bee can resist a flower in all its
luscious bloom. The [Maharshi’s] hall is becoming pervaded with a subtle,
intangible and indefinable power which affects me deeply. I feel, without
doubt and without hesitation, that the centre of this mysterious power is no
other than the Maharshi himself.
His eyes shine with astonishing brilliance. Strange sensation begins
to arise in me. Those lustrous orbs seem to be peering into the inmost
recesses of my soul. In a peculiar way, I feel aware of everything he can
see in my heart. His mysterious glance penetrates my thoughts, my emotions
and my desires; I am helpless before it.
At first, his disconcerting gaze troubles me; I become vaguely
uneasy. I feel he has perceived pages that belong to a past, which I have
forgotten. He knows it all, I am certain. I am powerless to escape; somehow,
I do not want to, either.
I become aware that he is definitely linking my own mind with
his, that he is provoking my heart into that state of starry calm, which he
seems perpetually to enjoy. In this extraordinary peace, I find a sense
of exaltation and lightness. Time seems to stand still. My heart is
released from its burden of care. Never again, I feel, shall the bitterness
of anger and the melancholy of unsatisfied desire afflict me. My mind is
submerged in that of the Maharshi and wisdom is now at its perihelion.
What is this man’s gaze but a thaumaturgic wand, which evokes a hidden
world of unexpected splendour before my profane eyes?
I have sometimes asked myself why these disciples have been
staying around the Sage for years with few conversations, fewer comforts
and no external activities to attract them. Now I begin to understand –
not by thought but by lightning like illuminations – that through all those
years they have been receiving a deep and silent reward.\n--- 第38页 ---\n16 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Hitherto, everyone in the hall has been hushed to a death-like
stillness. At length, someone quietly rises and passes out. He is followed
by another, and then another, until all have gone. I am alone with the
Maharshi! Never before has this happened. His eyes begin to change;
they narrow down to pinpoints. The effect is curiously like the ‘stopping
down’ in the focus of a camera lens. There comes a tremendous increase
in the intense gleam which shines between the lids, now almost closed.
Suddenly, my body seems to disappear, and we are both out in space! It is
a crucial moment. I hesitate – and decide to break the enchanter’s spell.
Decision brings power and once again I am back in the flesh, back in the
hall. No word passes from him to me. I collect my faculties, look at the
clock, and rise quietly. The hour of departure has arrived. I bow my head
in farewell and depart.
The following relates to Brunton’s second visit and stay near Sri
Ramana, a few months later:
Whatever I am doing I never fail to become gradually aware of
the mysterious atmosphere of the place, of the benign radiation which
steadily percolates into my brain. I enjoy an ineffable tranquility merely
by sitting for a while in the neighbourhood of the Maharshi. By
careful observation and frequent analysis, I arrive in time at the complete
certitude that reciprocal inter-influence arises whenever our presences
neighbour each other. The thing is most suitable. But it is quite unmistakable.
A force greater than my rationalistic mind awes me until it ends by
overwhelming me.
The realisation forces itself through my wonderment that all
my questions are moves in an endless game, the play of thoughts which
possess no limit to their extent; that somewhere within me there is a
well of certitude which can provide me all waters of truth I require;
and that it will be better to cease my questioning and attempt to realise
the tremendous potencies of my own spiritual nature. So I remain silent
and wait.
I am perfectly aware that the sublime realisation which has
suddenly fallen upon me is nothing else than a spreading ripple of telepathic
radiation from this mysterious and imperturbable man.
The Maharshi once told me, “The greatest error of a man is to
think that he is weak by nature, evil by nature. Every man is divine and
strong in his real nature. What are weak and evil are his habits, his desires
and thoughts, but not himself.” His words came as an invigorating tonic.
They refresh and inspire me. From another man’s lips, from some lesser\n--- 第39页 ---\nPaul Brunton 17
and feeble soul, I would refuse to accept them at such worth and would
persist in refuting them. But an inward monitor assures me that the Sage
speaks out of the depth of a great and authentic spiritual experience and
not as some theorizing philosopher on the thin stilts of speculation.
Not a few Western minds will inevitably consider that the life of
the Maharshi is a wasted one. But perhaps it may be good for us to have
a few men who are apart from our world of unending activity, and survey
it for us from afar. It may also be that a jungle Sage, with self lying
conquered at his feet, is not inferior to a worldly fool who is blown hither
and thither by every circumstance.
Day after day brings fresh indications of the greatness of
this man. His silence and reserve are habitual. One can easily count
up the number of words he uses in a single day.
I am learning to see that the Maharshi’s way of helping others is
through unobstrusive, silent and steady outpouring of healing vibrations
into troubled souls. Science will one day be required to account for this
mysterious telepathic process.
It is clear that his mere presence provides many with
spiritual assurance, emotional felicity and, most paradoxical of all,
renewed faith in their creed. For the Sage treats all creeds alike, and honours
Jesus no less than Krishna.
During daily meditation in the potent neighbourhood of the Sage, I
have learnt how to carry my thoughts inwards to an ever-deepening point.
Again and again, I become conscious that he is drawing my mind into his
own atmosphere during these periods of quiet repose. And it is at such
times that one begins to understand why the silences of this man are more
significant than his utterances.
There are moments when I feel this power of his so greatly
that I know that he has only to issue the most disturbing command
and I will readily obey it. But the Maharshi is the last person in the
world to place his followers in the chain of servile obedience, and
allows everyone the utmost freedom of action. In this respect he is
quite refreshingly different from most of the teachers and yogis I
have met in India.
The gist of his message is: “Pursue the enquiry, ‘Who am I?’
relentlessly. Analyse your entire personality. Try to find out where the ‘I’
thought begins. Go on with your meditations. Keep turning your attention
within. One day the wheel of thought will slow down and an intuition will
mysteriously arise. Follow that intuition, let your thinking stop and it will
eventually lead you to the goal.”\n--- 第40页 ---\n18 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
I struggle daily with my thoughts and cut away slowly into the
inner recesses of the mind. In the helpful proximity of the Maharshi, my
meditations and self-soliloquies become increasingly less tiring and more
effective. A strong expectancy and a sense of being guided inspire my
constantly repeated efforts.There are strange hours when I am clearly
conscious of the unseen power of the Sage being powerfully impacted on
my mentality, with the result that I penetrate a little deeper still into the
shrouded border land of being, which surrounds the human mind.
I study him intently and gradually come to see in him the child of a
remote past when the discovery of spiritual truth was reckoned of no less
value than is the discovery of a gold mine today. It dawns upon me with
increasing force that, in this quiet and obscure corner of South India, I
have been led to one of the last of India’s spiritual supermen.
The serene figure of this living Sage brings the legendary figure of
this country’s ancient rishis nearer to me. One senses that the most
wonderful part of this man is withheld. His deepest soul, which one
instinctively recognises as being loaded with rich wisdom, eludes one. At
times he still remains curiously aloof, and at other times the kindly benediction
of his interior grace binds me to him with hoops of steel. I learn to submit
to the enigma of his personality, and to accept him as I find him.
I like him greatly because he is so simple and modest, when
an atmosphere of authentic greatness lies so palpably around him;
because he makes no claim to occult powers and hierophantic knowledge
to impress the mystery-loving nature of his countrymen, and also because
he is so totally without any traces of pretension and he strongly resists
every effort to canonize him during his lifetime.
It seems to me that the presence of men like the Maharshi ensures
the continuity down history of a divine message from regions not easily
accessible to us all. It seems to me, further, that one must accept the fact
that such a sage comes to reveal something to us, not to argue anything
with us. At any rate, his teachings make a strong appeal to me.
He brings no supernatural power and demands no blind faith. He
avoids the dark and debatable waters of wizardry, in which so many
promising voyages have ended in shipwreck. He simply puts forward a
way of self-analysis which can be practised irrespective of any ancient or
modern theories and beliefs which one may hold, a way that will finally
lead man to true self-understanding.
Again and again, I am aware that the Maharshi’s mind is imparting
something to my own, though no words may be passing between us.\n--- 第41页 ---\nPaul Brunton 19
Spiritually my life is nearing its peak.
I enter the hall and straight away assume my regular meditation
posture. An intense interiorization of consciousness comes with the closing
of eyes. The Maharshi’s seated form floats in a vivid manner before my
mind’s eye. Then the picture disappears leaving me with nothing more than
a strongly felt sense of his intimate presence.
Tonight I flash swiftly to a pin-point of concentration. Some new
and powerful force comes into dynamic action within my inner world and
bears me inwards with resistless speed. In the next stage, I stand apart
from the intellect, conscious that it is thinking, and watch thoughts with a
weird detachment. The power to think, which has hitherto been a matter
for merely ordinary pride, now becomes a thing from which to escape, for
I perceive with startling clarity that I have been its unconscious captive.
It is strange enough to be able to stand aside and watch the very
action of the brain as though it were someone else’s and to see how thoughts
take their rise and then die, but it is stranger still to realise intuitively that
one is about to penetrate into the mysteries which hide in the innermost
recesses of man’s soul. I feel like some Columbus about to land on an
uncharted continent.
Finally it happens. Thought is extinguished like a snuffed candle.
The mind takes its rise in a transcendental source. I remain perfectly calm
and fully aware of who I am and what is occurring.Yet my sense of
awareness has been drawn out of the narrow confines of the separate
personality; it has turned into something sublimely all embracing. Self still
exists, but it is a changed, radiant self. With it arrives an amazing new
sense of absolute freedom, for thought is like a loom-shuttle which always
is going to and fro, and to be freed from its tyrannical motion is to step out
of prison into the open air.
I find myself outside the rim of world consciousness. The planet,
which has so far harboured me, disappears. I am in the midst of an ocean
of blazing light. The latter, I feel rather than think, is the primeval stuff out
of which worlds are created, the first state of matter. It stretches away into
untellable infinite space, incredibly alive.
I, the new I, rest in the lap of holy bliss. I have drunk the Platonic
Cup of Lethe, so that yesterday’s bitter memories and tomorrow’s anxious
cares have disappeared completely. I have attained a divine liberty and an
almost indescribable felicity. My arms embrace all creation with profound
sympathy, for I understand in the deepest possible way that to know all is
not merely to pardon all, but to love all. My heart is remoulded in rapture.\n--- 第42页 ---\n20 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
With the fall of dusk I take my farewells of everyone except
the Maharshi. I feel quietly content because my battle for spiritual
certitude has been won, and because I have won it without sacrificing
my dearly held rationalism for a blind credulity. Yet when the Maharshi
comes to the courtyard with me a little later, my contentment suddenly
deserts me.
This man has strangely conquered me and it deeply affects my
feelings to leave him. He has grappled me to his own soul with unseen
hooks that are harder than steel, although he has sought only to restore a
man to himself, to set him free and not to enslave him. He has taken me
into the benign presence of my spiritual self and helped me, dull Westerner
that I am, to translate a meaningless term into a living and blissful
experience. My adventure in self-metamorphosis is now over.
The following are a few of the many anecdotes recorded in A Search
in Secret India:
(i) Among the strangely diversified company of human beings
who pass through the hermitage, a pariah stumbles into the hall in some
great agony of soul or circumstances and pours out his tribulation at the
Maharshi’s feet. The Sage does not reply, for his silence and reserve are
habitual. Instead he gazes quietly at the suffering man, whose cries
gradually diminish until he leaves the hall two hours later a more serene
and stronger man.
(ii) A cultured Brahmin, college-bred, arrives with questions. One
can never be certain whether the Sage will make a verbal response or
not, for often he is eloquent enough without opening his lips. But
today he is in a communicative mood and a few of his terse phrases,
packed with profound meanings as they usually are, open many vistas of
thought for the visitor.
(iii) A peasant and his family have travelled over some hundred
miles to pay a silent homage to the Sage. He is totally illiterate, knows little
beyond his daily work, his religious rites and ancestral superstitions. He sits
on the floor quietly after having prostrated himself three times. The family
stays for a few hours, hardly speaking, and gaze in reverence at the
Maharshi. It is clear that the Maharshi’s mere presence provides
them with spiritual assurance and emotional felicity.
(iv) A large group of visitors and devotees are in the hall when
someone arrives with the news that a certain man, whose criminal reputation
is a byword in the town, is dead. Immediately, there is some discussion\n--- 第43页 ---\nPaul Brunton 21
about him, and as is the wont of human nature, various people get engaged
in recalling some of his crimes and the more dastardly phases of his
character. When the discussion appears to have ended, the Maharshi opens
his mouth for the first time and quietly observes, “Yes, but he kept himself
very clean, for he bathed two or three times a day!”
Brunton records in his second book The Secret Path:
In the Maharshi I discovered the last remnants of that ‘Mystic
East’ about which most of us often hear, but which few of us ever find. I
met an unusual man who quickly earned my humble veneration. For although
he belonged by tradition to the class of Wise Men of the East, a class
which has largely disappeared from the modern world, he avoided all record
of his existence and disdained efforts to give him publicity.
The world wants its great men to measure their lives by its puny
foot-rule. But no rule has yet been devised which will take their full height,
for such men, if they are really worth their name, derive their greatness, not
from themselves but from another source. And that source stretches far
away into the Infinite. Such sages dwell outwardly apart, keeping alive the
divine secrets, which life and fate have conspired to confide in their care.
The Maharshi interested me much despite the fact that his wisdom
was not of a kind which is easily apparent and despite the strong reserve
which encircled him. He broke his habitual silence only to answer questions
upon such recondite topics as the nature of man’s soul, the mystery of
God, the strange powers which lie unused in the human mind, and so on,
but when he did venture to speak I used to sit enthralled as I listened to his
soft voice and inspiration gleamed in those luminous eyes. Each phrase
that fell from his lips seemed to contain some precious fragment of
essential truth.
In the presence of the Maharshi one felt security and inward
peace. The spiritual radiations that emanated from him were all-
penetrating. I learnt to recognise in his person the sublime truths which
he taught, while I was no less hushed into reverence by his incredibly
sainted atmosphere. He possessed a deific personality which defies
description. I might have taken shorthand notes of the discourse of the
Sage, I might even print the record of his speech; but the most important
part of his utterances, the subtle and silent flavour of spirituality which
emanated from him, can never be reported.
One could not forget that wonderful pregnant smile of his, with its
hint of wisdom and peace won from suffering and experience. He was\n--- 第44页 ---\n22 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
the most understanding man I have ever known; you could be
sure always of some word from him that would smooth your way a
little, and that word always verified what your deepest feeling told
you already.
The words of the Maharshi flame out in my memory like
beacon lights. “I pluck golden fruits from rare meetings with wise men”,
wrote trans-Atlantic Emerson in his diary, and it is certain that I plucked
whole basketfuls during my talks with this man. Our best philosophers of
Europe could not hold a candle to him.
Brunton writes in his fourth book A Message from Arunachala:
I found my own good fortune and needed no other, for I
discovered one of the last of India’s spiritual supermen, the
Illuminated Sage of Tiruvannamalai. I ‘sat at his feet’, as the ancient Indian
phrase of pupilship poetically terms it, and thereby learned, through a
dynamic experience, of what divine and deathless stuff man is really made.
What higher fortune than that can we, pitiful mortals, require?
He sat as immobile as a rock in the ocean, cross-legged in
meditation. We foolishly imagine that such a man has failed to put up with
the bustling procession of life; it never occurs to us that he may have far
out-stepped it.
The Maharshi said, “Suffering turns men towards their creator.”
Such simple words – yet what a whole philosophy is congealed within
the phrase. You may think them to be platitudinous, and they would be,
did they not derive from a man who knew what he was talking about
because he ascended to spiritual regions beyond our ken, to
regions where God is.
The following is from The Note Books of Paul Brunton (vol.10):
Ramana Maharshi was one of those few men who make their
appearance on this earth from time to time and who are unique, themselves
alone – not copies of anyone else. Face to face with the Maharshi,
sometimes one felt in the presence of a visitor from another planet, at
other times with a being of another species.
Gazing upon this man, whose viewless eyes are gazing upon
infinity, I thought of Aristotle’s daring advice, “Let us live as if we were
immortal.” Here was one who might not have heard of Aristotle, but who
was following this counsel to the last letter.
The following is from The Silent Power: 1\n--- 第45页 ---\nPaul Brunton 23
(i) A Pure Channel for a Higher Power: Forty years have
passed since I walked into his abode and saw the Maharshi half-reclining,
half-sitting on a couch. After such a long period most memories of the past
become somewhat faded, if they do not lose their existence altogether. But
I can truthfully declare that in this case nothing of the kind has happened.
On the contrary, his face, expression, figure and surroundings are as vivid
now as they were then.What is even more important to me is that – at
least during my daily periods of meditation – the feeling of his radiant
presence is as actual and as immediate today as it was on that first day.
So powerful an impression could not have been made, nor continued
through the numerous vicissitudes of an incarnation which has taken me
around the world, if the Maharshi has been an ordinary yogi. I have met
dozens of yogis, in their Eastern and Western varieties, and many exceptional
persons. Whatever status is assigned to the Maharshi by his followers, my
own position is independent and unbiased. It is based upon our private talks
in those early days when such things were still possible, before fame brought
crowds; upon observations of, and conversation with those who were around
him; upon his historical record; and finally upon my own personal
experiences. Upon all the evidence one fact is incontrovertibly clear
that he was a pure channel for a Higher Power.
No physical phenomenon of an occult kind was ever witnessed
then; nothing at all happened outwardly. But those who were not steeped
too far in materialism to recognise what was happening within him and
within themselves at the time, or those who were not congealed too stiffly
in suspicion or criticism to be passive and sensitive intuitively, felt a distinct
change in the mental atmosphere. It was uplifting and inspiring: for the
time being it pushed them out of their little selves, even if only partially.
(ii) A Spiritual Torch: Since the day when I first found him,
absorbed in the mysterious trance of samadhi, I have travelled in many
lands but always my thoughts turned towards Tiruvannamalai as the
Muhammedan turns his face during prayer towards Mecca. I knew that
somewhere in the wilderness of this world there was a sacred place for
me.
At the Sage’s feet, I picked up a spiritual torch and carried it to
waiting souls in the lands of the West. They welcomed the light with
eagerness. There should be no virtue to be accredited to me for that, for
whatsoever benefit has accrued to Western seekers comes from the torch
which was lit by the Maharshi himself. I was only the unimportant ‘link boy’
the humble carrier. [ See Paul Brunton in photograph no.13 in the book.]\n--- 第46页 ---\n24 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
1. An anthology published by Sri Ramanasramam.
2
Sadhu Ekarasa (Dr. G.H. Mees, M.A., LL.D.) was a Dutch scholar
who came to the Maharshi in 1936. For him it was a case of deep
devotion from the very first meeting.
When Kon-Fu-Tse met Wen-Poh-Hsuche-Tse, he did not speak a
word. Then his companion, Tse-Lu, said, “Master, for a long time you have
wished to see Wen-Poh-Hsuche-Tse. Why is it that you don’t speak, now
that you see him?” Kon-Fu-Tse answered, “One only needs to look at
someone like him. There is no need for speaking. One must see a sage in
order to experience him.”
In the presence of the Maharshi, the same thing happened to me
when I saw him for the first time, and during the many years that I visited
him again and again, especially during the three years that I stayed near
him almost without interruption. It is for this same reason I find it ever
difficult to speak or write about the Maharshi, as I am often asked to do.
For a sage who always lives in the realisation, St Dionysius’s words hold
good: “All that you may say about God is untrue, for God is beyond speech
and therefore what you say about God relates to something else.” Therefore,
if in India someone asks me to speak or to write about the Maharshi, I am
inclined to answer that the questioner ought to visit the Maharshi and see
for himself.
Westerners have often asked me, “What exactly does the
Maharshi do?” One should in fact answer, “The daily occupation of the
Sage is to be himself.” Because he really succeeds in doing so, the
Maharshi makes such a great impression on many of his visitors.The
Maharshi effects drastic changes in the lives of many like me. That’s
what he does, and he does so by doing nothing at all. Often ‘the great of
this earth’ feel like small schoolboys while standing before him. The late
Maharaja of Mysore kneeled humbly before him and stood motionless
for a long time with tears in his eyes. He kneeled once more and departed
without a word.
If a man were to do the greatest deed in the world and come and
sit in the presence of Ramana Maharshi he would realise that his deed was
nothing compared to the perpetual deed of Self-realisation of the Sage.\n--- 第47页 ---\nSadhu Ekarasa 25
If a man were to write the greatest book in the world and come
and lay it as an offering before the Sage he would realise that the Sage
was a greater Book, which is written from day to day, not with the medium
of pen, ink and paper, without intermediation, and even without any
conscious effort, in the inner being of all who care to come and read it.
In the case of other personalities it is always possible to make a
distinction between theory and practice, or between spirituality and intellect
on the one hand and action on the other hand. With the Maharshi no such
distinction exists.
The Maharshi is above the spirit of time. His immortality
stands out from his every word and look. It lives in the inner heart
of all who have had the great privilege to come and sit in his
presence. It is reflected only poorly in the books and articles that have
been written about him. How could it be otherwise? No one can truly
describe God or Truth. Even so, no one can truly describe a Son of God
and an embodiment of Truth.
After having studied the lives and ways of teachings of saints and
sages of the world, it strikes one that Sri Ramana falls into a class of his
own. No one has achieved God-Realisation merely by hearing a name of
God. Sri Ramana received ‘initiation’ by merely hearing the name of
Arunachala, pronounced only for the purpose of conveying information
about a journey.
Sri Ramana claimed his spiritual heritage without even having been
told there was a heritage to claim. He is a Guru in the true sense of the
word – the word means ‘dispeller of darkness’. The Maharshi’s way is as
direct as it is simple. But it is so profound that it fails to reach the
consciousness of many. Many come to him for something definite, or, in
other words, finite. They do not understand that they stand in between the
true Initiation into the Mystery of Being and themselves.
Many times it has happened that visitors and resident disciples
have asked the Maharshi to vouchsafe them initiation, grace, blessings or
spiritual experience, and that he replied, “I am always giving it. If you
cannot comprehend it, what am I to do?”
In contradiction to gurus of a less exalted level, who are inclined
to be aware of their spiritual superiority, Ramana Maharshi considers all
beings to be potential jnanis with God-Reality shining within them, even if
they are not aware of it. Some of his utterances run parallel to that of the
eighth century mystic Hui Neng who said: “The only difference between a
Buddha and the average man is that one realises what the other discards.”\n--- 第48页 ---\n26 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Sri Ramana proclaims that the Divine Heritage is ever there, waiting to be
received; God-Reality is ever present within the Heart of all.
The average man is inclined to pity the Sage, whom he regards as
having foregone the pleasure of life.The Sage, however, pities his
sympathizing fellow human beings, because the latter do not know what
real happiness is.
From the point of view of the restless worldly mind, which delights
in movement and change, an unbroken stay of fifty years in one place
seems to be a tremendous achievement. It is indeed unique. But surely Sri
Ramana has never looked upon it as being in any way remarkable. He has
attained the Great Magnet of the world, the centre of the Heart, and became
as immovable as his Father, Lord Arunachala.
Extracts from his poem:
Heart’s Homage to Sri Ramana
To that incomparable Maharshi, the father and mother of all,
In whom Siva and the Goddess are ever united in Bliss,
To that Sage, whose presence delights the heart,
And whose leela is the wonder of all –
To him be offered mind, heart, body, – all creation!
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
If future generations will ask what was
The special note of Ramana the Sage,
I shall reply: If any, it is certainty;
The certain safety of a Rock, unmoved,
Unchallenged in a storm-swept sea,
The immovable solidity of a mountain
In an ever-wavering world of doctrines and philosophies,
Yea, truly art thou the Sage of ‘Arunachala’!
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)\n--- 第49页 ---\nBanning Richardson / K. Sundaram Chettiar 27
3
Prof. Banning Richardson, M.A. (Hons.) (Cantab.), A.B. (Princeton),
came to teach English literature at St. Stephens College, Delhi, in
the 1930s. He felt ‘ravished’ by the description of the Maharshi in
A Search in Secret India (no. 1).
In the presence of Sri Ramana Maharshi I felt an inward joy,
which suffused my consciousness, and made thinking seem superfluous.
I had come into touch with spiritualism of the finest type. When I
was in the presence of the Master I was so filled with joy and peace that
the desire to ask questions disappeared.This happened throughout the
brief three days [In May 1937] I stayed at Sri Ramanasramam.
When one comes into the presence of a man who is ‘good’ not
merely because he shuns ‘evil’ but because his love is universal and falls
alike on the just and unjust, then one experiences immediate recognition
of a soul that is not great as the world values greatness, but great when
compared to an absolute standard of values – a precious stone, an emerald
without flaw. It is a difference not merely of quality, but of kind. What
Jesus the Christ taught 2000 years ago that “I am in my Father
and my Father is in me. My Father and I are one” is the same as
He who teaches today at Tiruvannamalai.
4
Justice K. Sundaram Chettiar, B.A., B.L., of Madras High Court
wrote a foreword to the first well-known biography of Sri Ramana
by B.V. Narasimha Swami entitled Self Realization (1931).
The years 1909 and ’10 and the earlier part of 1911, when I was
the District Munsif of Tiruvannamalai, I deem it to be auspicious in my life
for the only reason that I had the privilege of sitting at the feet of Sri
Bhagavan.The more I came in contact with him, the greater was my
devotion to him. Sri Bhagavan is a mine of Wisdom. Questions on abstruse
subjects have been answered with clarity and directness, which would not
be possible except for a realized soul or jivanmukta. He sees everything
in himself and himself in everything. Whatever seems to happen in the\n--- 第50页 ---\n28 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
world is incapable of affecting his peace, which passeth understanding.
He has gone beyond the pair of opposites and looks at events in the
light of the Absolute. At no time the Sage has done anything on his own
initiative as if he has a particular desire for something, nor he has directed
others to do anything in fulfilment of any purpose. He has all the characteristics
of a sthitaprajna described in the Gita.
His very presence generates an atmosphere of peace which
is felt by devotees visiting him with sincerity and faith. Some of those who
approached him with a few questions in their mind found that the answers
were given anticipating their questions. Some find their doubts cleared
while sitting silently within his aura, without any speech by him.
5
Manu Subedar was a member of the Central Legislative Assembly
in pre-Independence era.
I was alone in the car from Katpadi to Tiruvannamalai and wanted
to go over my questions and revise them, if necessary. As I formulated
each question, I found I knew the answer! So when I went and had the
darshan of the Maharshi, I had really no question to ask.
I presented to the Maharshi the Avadhoota Gita and the
Ashtavakra Gita published by the Sastu Sahitya Mudranalaya Trust,
Ahemadabad, of which I am the chairman, and drew his attention to the
first verse of the Avadhoota Gita, which says: “It is only through the
Grace of God that in men with knowledge is born a desire to experience
cosmic unity, a desire which protects them from the great dangers of
samsara.”
With infinite compassion in his eyes the Maharshi looked at me
and instructed one of the followers to bring a book. This was the Maha
Bhakta Vijayam of Nabhaji. Bhagavan opened the book and began to
read. (I noted with awe that the book opened exactly at the page where he
intended to read.) The Maharshi seemed to relish reading the discourse.
There are teachers who mystify in order to impress the pupil. The
Maharshi, on the contrary, has the direct method. He discloses the truth
and the whole truth in the simplest form in which he has not only formulated
it as a thought, but lived it as an experience.
The look, which the Maharshi gives you, is a question. At least I\n--- 第51页 ---\nManu Subedar / William S. Spaulding / Grant Duff 29
felt it so. The question is: “I see a unity, but you keep grasping at the
variety. Why don’t you know yourself properly and realise your true self?
You can then march on to the realisation of the unity of self with the Self.”
Nothing is so helpful as the august presence of the Maharshi for those who
seriously intend to progress on the spiritual path.
There is spiritual communication and kindliness in his looks,
eliciting what is best in a person. His presence during the silent
hour acts as a catalyst, enabling us to secure our spiritual yearning.
There is grace and benignity in the way he looks at the devotees as
a mother looks at her children.
6
William S. Spaulding (Jr.) of New York City visited Sri Ramana in
the 1930s.
As I sat in His Presence for the first time, the most powerful
impression was that of what I can only call an almost palpable ‘golden
radiance’, the visual effect of a tremendous spiritual force. There was
an intense and subtle radiation that seems to flow from Him continually –
and once having sensed this, words, questions, techniques of meditation,
etc., seemed to dissolve immediately. The Maharshi also possessed
to a high degree of that quality which is described as ‘divine
indifference’, attributed to certain saints of the Christian Church.
This must not be taken to mean what is generally associated with the
term ‘indifference’, but rather as a beneficent, unfettered out-pouring of
healing radiations of a Realised Being.
7
Grant Duff (Douglas Ainslie), a scholar and a senior government
official in Madras Presidency in the 1930s, was nephew of Sir
Mountstaurt Grant Duff, Governor of Madras in the 1880s.
I do not know what happened when I saw the Maharshi for the
first time, but the moment he looked at me, I felt he was the Truth
and the Light. There could be no doubt about it, and all the doubts and
speculations I had accumulated during the past many years disappeared in\n--- 第52页 ---\n30 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
the Radiance of the Holy One. Though my visits to the Ashram were brief,
I felt that every moment I was there I was building up within me what
could never be destroyed.
There it did not take me long to see that I was in direct
contact with one who has passed beyond the boundaries of the
senses and was indeed already merged in the Absolute of his true
Self, though manifesting here for our benefit for a few brief years. [When
asked how he got such an impression, he frankly confessed] I cannot
reply; as I should to one who asked me how I saw the sun on looking out of
the window, by saying that I did so by the use of my eyes and incidentally
of all other senses collaborating. I do not need any algebraic or other proof
of the existence of the sun. I do not need any other proof of the divinity of
Ramana Maharshi.
Should those who have it in their power to visit the Ashram delay,
they will have only themselves to blame in future lives. Never perhaps in
world history was the Supreme Truth – Reality, Sat – placed within
such easy reach of so vast a multitude. Here and now through no
special merit of our own, we may approach Reality. The sole difficulty is
that of paying for the journey1 but the reward is Knowledge of the Self.
The Maharshi has extraordinary insight into other beings. He sees
and knows everything about all those who come before him. The Maharshi
has particularly appealed to me because of his extreme politeness
and gentleness. He is gentle to a degree that surpasses gentleness.
My visit to the Sage of Arunachala has been the greatest event in my life.
Extracts from his poem:
With Sri Ramana of Arunachala
I’ve wandered far: Yes I have been
From land to land to land:
Sages I’ve seen, great kings and queens
The lovely, wise and grand.
But only there – at the Asramam
By Arunachalam –
Have I known that joy without alloy,
I am! I am! I am!
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)\n--- 第53页 ---\nDilip Kumar Roy 31
1.This was written from London in 1935. Refer ‘Introduction’ to Sri Ramana Gita
published by Sri Ramanasramam.
8
Dilip Kumar Roy of Sri Aurobindo Ashram was a well-known
personality of his time and has authored many books. He was a
bhakta and a musician. Sri Ramana’s famous quote, “Bhakti is
jnanamata”(the mother of jnana) was in reply to his query
whether Sri Ramana advocated jnana and disparaged bhakti.
I first heard of Ramana Maharshi when I was a member of the
Ashram of Sri Aurobindo. I asked Sri Aurobindo about the Maharshi and
he wrote back that he was a yogi of remarkable strength and attainments
and that his tapasya had won ‘glory for India.’ On another occasion he
characterised him as a ‘Hercules among the yogis.’ So I longed to pay
a visit to Sri Ramanasramam.
When I arrived at the Ashram, I felt a deep malaise. How could I
hope to get peace and inspiration from the Maharshi if I had failed to get it
at the feet of my own Guru, who was surely no less great? Yet I felt
sincerely that I had done well in coming to seek inspiration from the great
yogi who was venerated by spiritual aspirants of every category.
I entered the hall of the great sage, where he has been living a
singular life, blessing all, but belonging to none, interested in everything but
attached to nothing. He gave the impression of Siva, the great God of
compassion, living a blissful, free and open life, with no walls of ego to
cabin the summit vision. What I saw impressed me deeply, though I find it
far from easy to portray what I saw or rather experienced. Here was a
man who lived like a god, supremely indifferent to all that we worldlings
clamour for without cease. Dressed in a bare koupin (loincloth) he yet sat
ensconced in grandeur of plenary peace and egoless bliss which we could
but speculate upon, yet never fathom.
I touched his feet and then, without a word, sat down near him
on the floor and meditated, my heart heaving with a strange exaltation
which deepened by and by into an ineffable peace and bliss which lasted
for hours and hours. Words seem utterly pale and banal the moment you
want to describe an authentic spiritual experience, which is vivid, throbbing
and intense.\n--- 第54页 ---\n32 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Later, as I reclined, bathed in peace, in an easy chair under the
stars at which I gazed in an ecstasy of tears, I felt deeply grateful towards
the Maharshi. I recalled a pregnant saying of his: “Just be. All is in you,
only a veil stands in between. You have only to rend the veil and then, well
just be.” I had found this favourite remark of his rather cryptic till now. But
at this moment I understood for the first time and wrote a poem in homage
to the Maharshi.
The Maharshi’s self-obliviousness was enchanting for me.
Greatness sat easily on him as beauty on a sunset cloud, but with a
devastating effect. All our ideas as to how the great should act seem to
be dismissed by him with a smile of simple disavowal. I saw with my own
eyes day after day during my five-day stay at the Ashram of this unique
sage, the like of whom I am sure is not to be met within this vast world.
I have never in my life of varied experience and wide
travelling met a man so utterly indescribable and yet so profoundly
moving. I cannot say why he moved me to my depths with eyes where no
soft light of emotion presided, and yet it bathed me when I met his gaze
with a peace that I find as unaccountable as it was delectable.
The Maharshi has not the slightest use for pretentiousness
and self-importance. He is for no trappings either of speech or
learning.
I saw indeed a man, who in his exterior was anything but distinguished,
far less handsome or captivating, and yet – how shall I put it – he was so
compelling and so disarming! I shall never forget how deeply stirred I was
when I saw his austere yet kind face in the light of electric lamps. The peace
I felt reminded me of the startled, though unvoiced query, of Paul Brunton
[No. 1]: “Does this man, the Maharshi, emanate the perfume of spiritual
peace as the flower emanates fragrance from its petals?”
I sang songs more than once in his presence. And everytime I
was ravished by his kind glance and bewitching smile. I realised for the
first time what is really meant by the word ‘sacred’.
Extracts from his poem:
To Sri Ramana Maharshi
O Son of Dawn! Who only knowest the Sun,
And through His eyes of Light see’st all that lies
Revealed – a flawless Plentitude which none
But Sun’s own children ever might surmise!\n--- 第55页 ---\nB. Sanjiva Rao 33
For only the chosen few so far have won
The Truth that shines beyond world’s wounds and cries;
Who see Thee, throned in the high dominion
Of Self’s invulnerable Verities,
Enjoy a glimpse of Bliss of the Beyond.
Thou singest: ‘Nay, ‘tis here’ – yet without Thy
Compassion’s pledge – how few would understand?
Homage to Thee, O minstrel of Clarity!
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
9
B. Sanjiva Rao, B.A. (Cantab.), belonged to the pre-Independence
Indian Educational Service.
Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi is a strange figure – one of the
strangest and yet one of the most fascinating and striking personalities of
all times. As a matter of fact he belongs not to any age, but to all
ages, not to time but to eternity.
The Maharshi has renounced as valueless all that the
modern world values most. He has no use for money; he is no
respecter of rank and position. His detachment is as complete as it
is perfect. Nothing seems to possess the power to disturb his
superpoise, his marvellous tranquility and peace. Tragedy does not
move him in a personal way. Pilgrims who come to witness the yearly
festival of lighting of the Beacon on the top of the Hill [Refer annexure -
II, p.355.] and worship it as the symbol of Siva, instinctively recognise the
presence of that same power in the Sage and give to him the same worship.
There is little doubt that an ageless Wisdom, as old as the Heart of the Hill
shines through those wonderful eyes which look with such perfect tranquility
and yet such deep compassion upon the suffering world.
The Maharshi is a living proof of the ancient advaitic thought.
He demonstrates the reality of Self-transcendence. He states that the
Ego-less state is the natural, the real state, that the Ego-state is the
unnatural and the false state. In the Ego-less condition, the true ‘I’ stands
apart from the apparent reaction of the mind. The Sage watches the
movements of the mind with the same objective detachment and\n--- 第56页 ---\n34 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
impartiality as the scientific investigator of a physical phenomenon. The
immediate effect of such self-scrutiny is quietening and stilling of the mind.
The Maharshi represents a very perfect instance of the
Ego-less state. He speaks little and only when he finds it necessary
to do so. Silence is to him the most powerful expression of Being,
which speech only hinders. He uses the Power of this Silence in a
most effective fashion. When any visitor presents him with a problem
for solution, he vouchsafes no answer but retires in the depths of his own
being. He becomes the embodiment of the very essence of Silence, and
in that tranquil quietness, the visitor finds his mind becoming still under an
overpowering radiation from the sage. In that stillness, the problem
dissolves and the visitor leaves the august presence marvelling what
mysterious power has come to his aid.
The Ego is the atom of the psychic world. If the disintegration of
the atom has given us so much power, what may not be accomplished by
the annihilation of this ego-self? The Sage of Tiruvannamalai can answer
this question. He himself is the living answer.
10
Justice N. Chandrasekhara Aiyar was High Court Judge at Madras.
I paid my homage to the sage only twice, and was struck by his
large luminous eyes, through which the very soul peeps into us, as it were.1
When he fixes his keen gaze on us, it looks as though he is
seeing the inner clockwork of a mechanism in a transparent case;
and you get the feeling that a mild current of grace is flowing into
you from him.
He is a veritable storehouse of spiritual energy and wisdom.
He radiates shanti or Peace, and those who come into contact with him
feel a subtle, pervasive and godly influence greatly spreading over them.
Such men belong to a superlative category of their own. He speaks
very little, but when he does speak his words roll out slowly, with deliberate
and telling effect. His silence is however more eloquent than his
speech. The tremor of his head is suggestive of the famous Upanishadic
teaching - not this, not this.
Perfect detachment, indifference to pain and pleasure, absolute
renunciation, true mental equipoise are hallmarks of the Indian rishis. Sri
Ramana belongs to this great hierarchy of Seers.\n--- 第57页 ---\nN. Chandrasekhara Aiyar / Eleanor Pauline Noye 35
To be in his presence is by itself a stirring experience in
the elevation of the soul; to receive a few words of counsel from
him is a rare blessing; to be the recipient of his benediction is to be
assured of a special fortune.
1. Refer Paul Brunton (no. 1): ‘In so far as the human eyes can mirror divine
power, it is a fact that the Sage’s do that.’ A Search in Secret India.
11
Eleanor Pauline Noye of California visited the Ashram twice in 1940
and stayed for about ten months.
My heart throbbed with expectation as I was taken to the
hall. As I entered, I felt the atmosphere filled with Sri Bhagavan’s
Purity and Blessedness. One feels a breath of the Divine in the Sage’s
presence. When He smiled it was as though the gates of Heaven
were thrown open. I have never seen eyes more alight with
Divine Illumination – they shine like stars. His look of Love and
Compassion was a benediction that went straight to my heart. I was
immediately drawn to Him. One feels such an uplifting influence in
His saintly presence and cannot help but sense His extraordinary
spirituality.
It is not necessary for Him to talk, His silent influence of love and
light is more potent than words could ever be. I do not think there is another
like Him on earth today. To see Him is to love Him. As I looked upon Sri
Bhagavan’s serene face and into His eyes which beamed with mercy, my
soul was stirred. He knew how much I needed Him, while He looked
straight into my heart. Everyone who comes to Him is blessed; the inner
peace which is His is radiated to all.
I had not slept well for years, although I had been taking medicine.
I said nothing to Sri Bhagavan about this. The amazing thing was that I
slept soundly the first night and thereafter without taking any medicine. I
received ‘the Medicine of all medicines’, the unfailing grace of the Lord.
I arose next morning, feeling refreshed, as though I were born anew.
Soon after, as I was standing by the gate one afternoon, Sri Bhagavan
stopped while on His way to the hill and asked me, “If I had more peace.”
His loving solicitude made me feel quite at home; and when He smiled
my joy knew no bounds.\n--- 第58页 ---\n36 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
When I left America, I longed for peace. Here at the feet of the
Lord of Love, peace and happiness garlanded me and enriched my
being. I know that Bhagavan led me to this heaven of rest. Mere words
can never express the peace and joy felt in His Presence; it must be
experienced. There one truly has a glimpse of the Eternal. The most
Blessed experience of my life was my stay at the feet of Bhagavan
Sri Ramana Maharshi.
The Ashram is so primitive, but therein lies its charm. It is truly the
Holy-land. The air is permeated with His peace and love. On full moon
night it is especially inspiring to go round the hill. In this deep silence and
quietude one readily hears the voice of God.
I reluctantly made plans to leave the place. I had grown to love it
and was very sad during those last days. Sri Bhagavan said, “I will always
be with you, wherever you go.”
When the last day arrived, I could not stop crying. In the
afternoon when I sat before Sri Bhagavan He smiled and said, “She
has been crying all day; she does not want to leave me!” Later I went
to Him for His blessings. The pain of parting was almost more than I
could bear; with tears in my eyes I knelt with deepest reverence and
devotion before my beloved Master. May He always be my Father,
Mother and God; and may I always be His child, and whatever I do,
may it be in His name.
She wrote the following after the Maharshi’s mahanirvana:
What tribute can a candle pay to the sun? What we best conceive,
we fail to speak. Words cannot express the infinite love and tenderness
we experienced during those days beside him. He seemed to clasp us to
his bosom as a mother clasps her child. As we beheld his utter submission,
one could not help but think of Lord Jesus before the crucifixion. Sri
Bhagavan treated his body as something apart from him. As the body
grew weaker his face became more radiant, his eyes shone like two stars.
He was ever abiding in the Self. A few days before he passed away, he
remarked, “They say I am dying, but I shall be more alive than before.”
Now he is all pervading.
Internationally renowned psychologist Dr. C.G. Jung of Zurich
has said, “What we find in the life and teachings of Sri Ramana is the
purest of India with its breadth of world liberated and liberating humanity,
it is a chant of the millenniums.”\n--- 第59页 ---\nK.S. Venkataramani / C. Kunhan Raja 37
12
K.S.Venkataramani, M.A., B.L., was Adviser to the former
Alwar State (Rajasthan).
Truth or Reality is indescribable, and words obscure more and
reveal less. Words take us nowhere in Self-realisation. Therefore, nothing
like an immersion in Sri Bhagavan’s immediate presence.
His presence kindles your swanubhava and sets you on the
immortal path of Self-enquiry. His silence ambushes your hundred doubts
of the mind in his presence.
Sri Bhagavan is an ocean of tranquility. There is Peace in
his presence that passeth all comprehension. He greets you and
clasps you not by the monkey-hand of the mind, but by the invisible
divine feelers of his heart. He touches you by a fourth-dimensional
touch: the touch of the Master that detaches the mind from the
fetters of its own dear ego-world.
How infinite is the Grace of Sri Bhagavan, but how little we profit
by it! He rolls on sublimely like a deep river in flood, unmindful of the
wastefulness and the ignorance of the human dwellers on the banks. There
is an elemental sublimity about Sri Bhagavan like that of the winds and the
waves, the sun and the stars.
Sri Bhagavan’s sovereign sadhana for Self-realisation is ‘Self-
enquiry’. It requires no asana or yogic ritual, but a strenuous turning of the
mind inward. It is the shortest though the most rugged short cut to attain
the sublimation of the mind. It is a process that makes the mind first fatigued,
annoyed and churlish. It may set free at first only dense smoke and no
spark, like green fuel on fire. But if you persist long enough, you will be
surely rewarded with the flame of illumination, smokeless and glowing.
13
Dr. C. Kunhan Raja was Director of Adyar Library, Theosophical
Society, Madras.
While I was in the Hall during the one day I was in the Ashram, I
took my seat along with others. I sat for hours together both in the forenoon
and in the afternoon. Except for the first few words of greetings and my\n--- 第60页 ---\n38 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
reply thereto, I did not talk at all. Though there was no actual talk between
us, there was an unbroken communion.
What produced on me a great impression is the repose,
the unruffled calmness that prevailed in the place as a result of the
presence of the Maharshi. He seldom spoke. There was always a
look of serene joy in his face; sometimes it glowed up into a lustre
of bliss; at times I noticed that he rose into a state of samadhi or
trance. But that look of blissful peace was always there. I cannot say
he was unaware of his surroundings; indeed, he was always in the fullness
of unbroken awareness, but the surroundings made no fluctuations in him.
When people prostrated themselves before him or when they offered
presents, there was the same look on his face. The mode of salutation and
the mode of approach made no difference to him. To him, it was one,
continuous state of serene peace and joy – ananda.
While he appears quite unconcerned with things around him, he
was not only attentive but also alert in correcting pronunciation in the
recitation of Tamil verses.
The very fact that the Maharshi makes enquiries about the visitors,
looks into his correspondence, pays attention to the cleanliness and tidiness
of his environment, keeps certain programmes in his daily routine and sticks
to them with punctuality, shows that to him this physical world is an integral
part of the Reality.
The Maharshi is a linguist, knowing, besides his Tamil in which he
is a great author and poet, English, Sanskrit, Telugu and Malayalam. He
spoke the three South Indian languages with perfect ease.
It was a great privilege for me to visit the Ashram. Till now I had
only read about the Maharshis in the puranas. The presence of a Maharshi
in this world at a time when there is utter anarchy in science, must be an eye-
opener for the scientists, in that they will think of expanding the scope of
science so as to include the truth of the scientist himself, instead of confining
science to what the scientist is aware of as external, objective reality.1
1. Refer Paul Brunton: “The most astounding discoveries will come when our
scientists turn away for a while from metal and stone and electricity to examine
and explore the nature of self within the laboratory of man. Scientists already
know that the real seeing agent in sight is not the eye but the mind that uses that
organ. They have yet to discover what it is that works the mind. And when they
do that they will come into contact with the real Self of man, the being out of
whom both mind and body derive their existence and maintain their lives.” A
Message from Arunachala (1936).\n--- 第61页 ---\nMadan Mohan Varma 39
14
Madan Mohan Varma, Registrar, University of Rajputana was later
Chairman, Rajasthan Public Service Commission, Jaipur.
For fifty years the Purusha [God] has chosen for the benefit of
humanity, to keep the mortal frame known as Ramana, radiating through
it to all who can see, hear and ‘feel’ the LIFE sustaining the frame.
Humanity reaches its high watermark in such a life, so indeed such a
life is a blessing to humanity.
Shaken by a personal bereavement, the reaction of which at
once laid bare the hollowness of the writer’s previous religious studies
and pretensions spanning over 25 years, and epitomised his deluded
intellect, the writer dragged himself over a distance of 2,000 miles to
Tiruvannamalai.Five days at the Sage’s Ashram, but no miracle.The writer
came back somewhat soothed but also somewhat disappointed. He had
hurled scores of ‘questions’ on religious matters at the Maharshi. But he
was indifferent. Only when the writer sought the permission to leave –
with sorrow still darkening his heart – he smiled a gracious blessing which
is still fresh in the writer’s memory, a blessing which seemed to arise
from the secret recesses of the Heart, and the like of which he had never
received before from any mortal.
The writer had occasion to meet many a great man in the
past, to listen to their orations, to read their teachings and to follow
their instructions. Often he was inspired and uplifted. But like the sea
wave it all appeared to recede as time passed. But this time, O
Maharshi! What ‘Time Bomb’ you stole into my being which has
since, as if from beneath, been mining many a fond castle of ego.
Even though the outer life remains the same as ever, a plaything of
gunas, the ship of life finds its course changed, all unknown. And
while all the old bonds are visible in their majesty as before, the gold
fetters somehow seem to be losing their ‘gold’. From ‘outside’ you
pushed me ‘inside’. You have blessed me with your contact and
removed many a cobweb of the deluded intellect, and pulled me
from the ‘circumference’ to the ‘center’. A tribute? You need no
tribute from me. And what tribute can a poor candle pay to the
sun?\n--- 第62页 ---\n40 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
15
Ella Maillart, a Swiss travel writer and photographer, met the
Maharshi in the 1940s. Two captivating photographs of Sri Ramana
shot by her are in the photo-album Radiance of the Self, published
by the Ramana Maharshi Centre, Bangalore.
I don’t think it is within my power to depict the subtle atmosphere
which renders the place [the Ashram] unique in its setting of dry and
hard beauty.
Westerners who come to know the Maharshi feel constrained
to say how puzzled they are by the inactivity of the Sage. We having
identified ourselves with our bodies are convinced that one has to be
visibly active. We forget that inactivity is the basis of its corollary activity;
that the useful wheel could not exist or move without a motionless
center.
I felt strongly at Tiruvannamalai that such great ones as the
Maharshi are the salt of the earth. Something intangible emanates from
these realised men; they sanctify the land through their presence. The
Sage has attained a certitude which makes him free from restlessness,
free from fear, desire and doubt – he can do things none of us can do,
because he is egoless. Those who live near him have the conviction that he
knew what he was talking about, who knew the ‘why and how’ of what
had been harassing them. They stopped worrying continually about problems
they were never meant to solve.
He is a link between what we call the concrete world and the
Unmanifest. He is a living symbol of that knowledge without which
the humanity of today is but a pitiful joke. He implants a lasting peace
in the centre of every man’s heart.
What do we see in the West of today? Every moment adding to
the despair of men lost in fruitless researches. Hopelessness gaining
ground, each one being obliged to seek a solution along alleys most of
which become blind.
The Sage of the Vedanta symbolises a link between the
unknowable ultimate and man. The Sage relies on actionless activity
and carries on wordless teaching.\n--- 第63页 ---\nElla Maillart / Swami Siddheswarananda 41
16
Swami Siddheswarananda, an erudite scholar of Vedanta was Head,
Ramakrishna Mission, Paris.
In an article, Prof. M.Lacombe of the University of Paris wrote
about the Maharshi as follows: “His person sheds a force consisting of
intelligence and mastery of the Self. A flashing eye, intense and fixed without
hardness, Olympian softness of gesture, slender and delicate in an immobile
body, he is considered by excellent judges to be a very authentic yogi to
have reached the highest Realisation.”
Sri Ramana Maharshi expounds a system of thought and philosophy
of life which incarnates the essence of Vedantic teachings.The Maharshi
discovered Truth; he found it of his own accord, without any exterior help.
He had the direct experience of the Self. It is called aparokshanubhuti.
It is distinct from all knowledge obtained by intellectual effort. He who has
this direct experience of the Self is considered to be liberated even while
he is still alive. He is called jivanmukta.The existence of such
individuals, who are living incarnations of the Truth, renders the
Truth demonstrable. The Vedantic realisation of these great beings gives
in effect the possibility of a practical application, and their realisations raise
the level of human consciousness.
The Maharshi is a tattva jnani and the field of his search and
experience is much greater than that of a mystic. The Sage transcends the
limits of the three gunas.
Whoever has occasion to examine at first-hand the Maharshi, knows
full well that he is neither an ‘extrovert’ nor an ‘introvert’. He is the most
normal human that one can ever find. He is in effect a sthitaprajna, the
man whose intelligence is solidly founded. I have seen him apparently plunged
in himself, but when someone at the end of the hall made a mistake in the
recitation of certain Tamil verses, the Maharshi opened his eyes, corrected
the mistake, then again closed his eyes and returned to his former state.
When I saw him I found in him the perfect example of the
description which Sri Sankaracharya gives in his Vivekachudamani,
when he explains what characterises a jivanmukta. According to verse
429: He who even when his mind is merged in Brahman, is nevertheless
entirely awake, but is at the same time free from the characteristics of the\n--- 第64页 ---\n42 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
waking state and whose realisation is free from all desires, should be
considered a man liberated while still alive.
At my request, the Maharshi recited certain lines from the
composition of the Saint Manikyavachakar where the author spoke of the
condition of the soul melted in love; hardly had the Maharshi pronounced a
few lines when there was a brilliance in his face. He who rarely expresses
his inner emotion in any outward form, could not restrain a few silent tears.
A slanting ray of the morning sun from the hillside made the scene still
more vivid. A peace that passeth all understanding pervaded the whole
atmosphere. For more than an hour there was perfect silence. It looked as
if one of the fresco paintings of Ajanta had come to life.
The Maharshi can be best described in the words of the Gita:
One who is satisfied in the Self by the Self (II. 55); the self-controlled one
(XII. 14); one with firm determination (XII. 14); the desireless one (XII.
16); one who has renounced all enterprise (XII.16); content with anything
(XII.19); sitting like one unconcerned (XIV. 23). Further, he is the man
who revels here and now in the Self alone, and in the Self alone is content
– for him there is no work which he must do (III. 17); he who is inwardly
happy, revels within, and who likewise becomes the Light within, that yogi
becomes the Brahman and realises the transcendental Bliss of the
Brahman (V. 24).
Based on the commentary of Sankara on the 89th Karika of the
4th chapter of Mandukya Karikas, the Maharshi is Mahadhi, or the
man of the highest intellect, as he has understood that which
transcends all human experiences. His omniscience is constant
and remains undiminished.
He is the person with no tendency at all to proselytise. He has
no mission to achieve. According to Sankara in the Nirvanashtaka, he
alone can say, “I have no death nor fear, no distinction of rank or class.
I have no father, no mother, no friend, no master, no disciple; I am
Absolute Knowledge and Bliss. I am the all-pervading Self, I am the
all-pervading Self.”
Like the great fire which burns on the Hill Arunachala,1 the
Maharshi is a veritable lighthouse for those who wish to find in
modern India the revivifying effects of the teachings of Upanishads
consecrated by time.
1. Refer annexure-II, p. 411.\n--- 第65页 ---\nT.M. Krishnaswami Aiyar / K.S. Ramaswami Sastri 43
17
T.M. Krishnaswami Aiyar, B.A., B.L., was Chief Justice of the
former Travancore State (Kerala).
I first saw the slim figure of a yogi who seemed to be the flame of
a candle. The candle has now grown into Sri Ramanasramam. The flame
is still there as it was. The paradox is that the flame feeds the candle and
not the candle the flame.
Bhagavan Ramana is a remarkable personality. He has now
become an expanding atmosphere. The Ashram cannot interest those who
have not learnt to seek the treasures of man’s inner consciousness, or to
catch the message of silence. For him who yearns to look without, Bhagavan
Ramana will show the world within.
Bhagavan Ramana has frequently told the seekers after truth that
if one learns about oneself as every being the ‘I’ of itself, one knows
oneself as well as the world. It must mean the illumination of the spirit and
its upheaval.
The message of peace and love, of meditation and realisation, and
of service and universalism has a great value in setting humanity on a
higher plane. Sri Ramanasramam is an oasis in the desert of the
modern world. It is the life-spring of love and life.
18
K.S. Ramaswami Sastri, B.A., B.L., was Chief Justice of the
former Pudukottah State (Tamil Nadu).
I have gone to the Maharshi often during these forty years and
more [written in 1946]. I have seen him when he was in a small cave up
the hillside absorbed in mysterious and unbroken silence. I have also seen
him when he came down the hillside. I used to ply him with questions about
the soul and he used to smile and give brief, bright, blessed replies dispelling
doubt.The world-intoxicated mind became subdued, calm and
purified in the holy atmosphere of the Sage.
When we sat before him, time rolled on while we were oblivious
of its course. Each felt a sense of inner release and was happy as a bird
sailing through the vast expanse of the blue sky. The inner Fullmoon of\n--- 第66页 ---\n44 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Divine Rapture rose in the sky of the hearts of all. Then came to my
mind the great passage in Oscar Wilde’s De Profundis about Christ:
“Indeed, that is the charm about Christ; when all is said, He is just like a
work of art. He does not really teach one anything, but by being brought
into His presence one becomes something.” I felt that I was predestined
to the Sage’s presence and went into the stillness of the night, moving
away from him physically but feeling drawn nearer to him in spirit like a
steamer borne against the wind.
The Maharshi lived in unbroken communion with the Self and
became sthitaprajna (the man of steadfast wisdom). The Maharshi’s
religion is the most universal of all faiths: Change your mentality,
why change the environment and run into a forest? Attain self-control,
self-knowledge and self-reverence. Atma-siddhi is the highest siddhi.The
Maharshi’s Gospel of Self-enquiry is the Upanishadic gospel. It sublimates
and merges the mind or ego in the Self.
19
Dr. K.C.Varadachari, M.A., Ph.D., was a scholar based inTirupati.
Sri Ramana Maharshi opens up a dawn in the spiritual under-
standing of the modern day. We enjoy the perfume of his presence, but
we cannot obviously know to which infinite stretches of space the perfume
is being carried.
In April 1937, I had the good fortune of beholding him face to
face. This darshan of the Sage is an experience in itself. It is not
capable of being described. So very casual yet pregnant, so very
unobstrusive yet deeply significant, pleasant, deeply penetrating
and inspiring somewhere in the depth.
Sri Ramana’s consciousness illumined with tremendous power of
discrimination proceeds to find out the nature of the Self, that which all of
us call the ‘I’, its origin, so to speak. ‘Who am I?’ is the fundamental
question posed by Sri Ramana. This question is comparable to Kant’s1
famous question: ‘How is experience possible?’ Instead of walking down
the corridor to the ‘phenomenal’ being like Kant, Sri Ramana ascended up
the ‘noumenal’ being [which in Kantian philosophy is a thing in itself,
independent of sensory or intellectual perception.]\n--- 第67页 ---\nK.C. Varadachari / Giridhari Lal 45
Sri Ramana brings back to mankind the Reality of the ancient
seers, rishis. He reveals the Himalayan possibilities of peace - soul-peace,
that annihilates all strife, and of the perennial life that tolerates no distrust
or disruption.
The life of Sri Ramana bears witness to the ever-abiding reality of
the teachings of the Vedic seers, and continues uninterrupted the spiritual
tradition of the sanatana philosophy. May Sri Ramana be with us forever
and ever more!
1. A well-known German philosopher.
20
Giridhari Lal was a resident of Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondi-
cherry in the 1940s.
Day by Day with Bhagavan by Devaraja Mudaliar (no. 35) has the
following entry dated March 18, 1946:
In response to Giridhari Lal’s question, “When the kali yuga,
which consists of so many thousand years, would end?” Bhagavan said: I
don’t consider time real. So I take no interest in such matters. We know
nothing about the past or the yugas which were in the past. Nor do we
know about the future. But we know the present exists. Let us know about
it first. Then doubts will cease. Time and space always change, but there is
something which is eternal and changeless. For example, the world and
time, past or future, nothing exists for us in sleep. But we exist. Let us try
to find out that which is changeless and which always exists. How will it
benefit us to know that the kali yuga started in such and such year and
that it would end so many years from now?
Regarding the devotee’s query as to why the puranas give the
exact duration of each yuga, Bhagavan replied: The immensity of the
periods of time assigned to each yuga may be a mere device to draw
man’s attention to the fact that even if he lived upto hundred years, his life
is such a trifling, insignificant fraction of a yuga. Therefore, he should take
a proper view of his humble place in the entire scheme and not go about
with a swollen head, deeming himself as of great importance. Instead of
saying, What is man’s life compared to eternity? They have taught him
to consider how short his span is.\n--- 第68页 ---\n46 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Extracts from his poem:
Sri Maharshi – The Alchemist
What Maharshi knew at seventeen, we don’t know at seventy. Why?
Ah! We lack the fire; our hearts are cold and our heads are hard.
Alas! What shall we do?
Go to Maharshi? Yea; He’ll lend us fire, warm our hearts – now cold –
And turn the stones in us into Gold.
That is Maharshi, the Alchemist.
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
21
Prof. B.L.Atreya, M.A., D.Litt., was Head, Dept. of Philosophy
and Psychology, Benaras Hindu University.
I had the privilege of being at the Ashram of Ramana Maharshi
for a short time in March 1940. He made a deep impression on my mind, a
mind that has been moulded by a study of scientific and philosophic writings
of the East as well as of the West. The greatest peculiarity of Ramana
Maharshi’s life is that although he has moulded and perfected his personality
on the lines of Advaita Vedanta, a purely Indian way of Self-realization, he
is highly appreciated and resorted to by the Western seekers and by those
Indians who have been educated on Western lines.
Ramana Maharshi’s greatness is deeply founded. It is based on
his actual living by the creed of the Advaita Vedanta, which holds that the
reality is one without a second, that everything in this universe is but one
Reality, which is Existence-Consciousness-Bliss. True to his creed, he
regards nothing alien, none as other, no event as undesirable. For him the
ideal is the real and the real is the ideal. He has no other relation with any
body but that of love. Love, affection, kindness, mercy etc., which are
expressions of one and the same thing, and the feeling of unity with all,
ever flow from him. Jnana is like akasha [the sky]. The supreme Self
which is to be known through sadhana is like the ether. The various objects
we see in the world as well as the souls are also like the ether. Therefore,
who is to know which? What is to be known by what? The supreme
realization is that there is no plurality. True knowledge is ‘distinction-less’.\n--- 第69页 ---\nB.L. Atreya / Oliver Lacombe / Syed M. Hafiz 47
That knowledge is the Self, the light divine. That knowledge is Bhagavan
Ramana.This is the secret of the Maharshi’s unique greatness and
consequent popularity. The whole of humanity owes its homage to
this great Sage amidst us.
22
Oliver Lacombe was L’Attache Culturel, Consulat General de
France, Calcutta.
The visit I had the honour to pay in May 1936 to Tiruvannamalai
was only a short one. It was long enough, anyhow, to impress with a strong
feeling that I had met there, for a few moments, with a genuine vidvan,
an exceptionally true representative of Hindu spirituality.
Sri Ramana Maharshi has gone through a series of psycho-
spiritual experiences that are as old as the Upanishads. The teaching
of the Sage Ramana, by its aphoristic character, as well as because
of the intense personality of its author, enhances to the highest pitch
the whole Advaitic tradition. The Maharshi’s method is comprised
within the simple interrogation: ‘Who am I?’ With him, three words
only are enough to sum up the long traditional description of the way
of liberation. As mentioned by the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, “Lo,
verily, it is the self that should be seen, that should be harkened to,
that should be thought on, that should be pondered on …”
Ulladu Narpadu’s1 startling simile of the diver expresses most
vividly his method: As one who dives, seeking to find something that has
fallen into water.
1. Reality in Forty Verses written by Sri Ramana.
23
Prof. Syed M. Hafiz, M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt., was Head, Dept. of
Philosophy, Allahabad University.
Unlike all the saints, sages and prophets, the Maharshi is the only
sage who has realised the Truth Eternal that keeps the flame of spiritual\n--- 第70页 ---\n48 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
wisdom alive. He is the perennial source of inspiration to the earnest aspirant
on the path of spiritual development. Without him the world would not have
had the light of the spirit to dispel the darkness of material existence. Sri
Ramana embodies in him the Truth that is beyond time and space. He
stands supreme in the realm of spiritual attainment and is the true
benefactor of the whole of the human race. In him we see that glorious
realisation which at once includes and transcends all religions. His teachings
give the clearest expression to that one - inexpressible, universal, spiritual
experience, seeking which every earnest aspirant treads the path of inward
spiritual development.
The Maharshi never dogmatised, he never sermonized, never
gave any mantra, or expected people to follow any set mode of worship.
What the Maharshi does for us cannot be conveyed by word of
mouth. His invisible gaze, silently, unobstrusively transforms the lives of
the men and women who, by virtue of their past good deeds, are gathered
around him, waiting for his benign attention and paternal guidance. All his
great work for the improvement and betterment of mankind is done invisibly
and silently. His silence is more eloquent, more effective, more far-
reaching than the sermons of any number of teachers put together.
His grace is ever ready for us. All that we have to do is to qualify ourselves
by our self-effort and self-purification to make ourselves worthy of his
attention.
In March 1935, I read A Search in Secret India by Brunton [No.1],
and visited the Ashram in December of that year. I visited the Maharshi
again in 1936. The year 1937 was the most momentous in my life. I had to
stay in one of the rooms of the Ashram for over a month due to my serious
illness. It was during those days that I realised vividly his greatness as
a divine master endowed with all spiritual and human qualities. While
I was lying ill with high fever the Maharshi was considerate enough to visit
me three times and prepare upma for me with his own hands.
My eyesight was affected by high fever. When parting from him
I took hold of his toes and touched my eyes with them. That was sufficient
guarantee of the fact in my heart that my eyesight would not fail me. So it
has not. I shall never forget his grace that he gave me during my serious
illness. I had no idea of what it was till I returned to my place in North India
and felt its purifying effect on my life. From 1943 onwards, I never missed
a year when I did not visit him. His sense of humanity was as great as
his sense of spirituality. The mere sight or tale of human suffering
touched his heart.\n--- 第71页 ---\nA.S. Panchapagesa Ayyar 49
All he expected of us was to closely and critically analyse the
content of our own being, to discover what we really were, to see if there
was anything in us which survived the decay of our bodily frame. His
words went straight into our heart because he lived what he taught.
Contact with Ramana Maharshi can change our outlook and
convince us not only of the reality but also of the immense utility of spiritual
values. He does not believe in propaganda of any kind, nor does he lecture
to any of his numerous admirers and devotees. Most of the time he sits
silently transforming the hearts and minds of those who are
privileged to be near him. By the living example of his intensely
methodical and practical life he helps and reforms us. His plain, simple and
unsophisticated philosophy vividly reflected in his day-do-day conduct serves
as a key to unlock the mystery of life and solves in a practical way some of
the complicated social, political and economic problems that confront us
today.
He enjoins on us that there is only One Self, One Life which is
vibrant in every atom, One Light which is vibrant in every creature, One
Love that embraces all in Oneness. According to Sri Ramana, unless you
realise purity and goodness in yourself, you cannot do anything really good
to ‘others’.
The Sage of Arunachala is really a spiritual scientist, who
has adopted the scientific method of approach to Truth by investigating
the realm of the Unknown with the aid of his intuitive genius, which has
assimilated reason. He has attained self-realisation through his own self-
effort and intensive introspection. He is the greatest of modern Sages
of India.1
1. For an interesting episode of Prof. Syed’s wife being insistent about Sri
Ramana to have dinner at her place, refer pp.181-2.
24
A.S. Panchapagesa Ayyar belonged to the Indian Civil Service of
pre-Independence era.
I was first attracted to the great Sage Ramana by reading his
book Who Am I? I liked immensely his clear exposition of the matter\n--- 第72页 ---\n50 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
which was only the typical Hindu exposition, viz., that the real ‘I’ is not the
gunny-bag of the body, or the Decca muslin of the mind, or the spider’s
web of the ego, but something above and beyond all this, viz., the atman.
He said to one and all, “Look within. Don’t look around”
Just as a skilled financier is required to direct the nation’s finances,
and create surpluses to pay off the debts and secure redemption, so too,
individuals will require a man of God, like Ramana Maharshi, to guide
them, to enable them to increase their merit and decrease their demerit,
and secure redemption. No wonder then, that men of diverse temperaments
have been flocking to Sri Ramanasramam to see the Sage and profit by his
presence and his instruction.
The Maharshi’s life is ‘sacrifice of knowledge’, by dissemi-
nating it to all and sundry. Anyone can go and sit near him, invited or
uninvited. Anyone can partake of the homely meal in the Ashram, whether
native or foreigner, high caste or outcast. The Maharshi has not the least
tinge in him of caste, creed, colour, race, class, sex or country. He has not
only sacrificed all ideas of private possession in his supreme attempt
of possessing the soul, he has sacrificed even the privacy of time. He
sits, day in and day out, in that little hall of his, and even sleeps in the presence
of all. He is a sublime example of what a sage ought to be. He has
never known the hold of lust for woman or money – kamini or kanchanam,
to use the expressive words of Sri Ramakrishna, and is a perfect
brahmachari. He is an embodiment of the Hindu truth that karma, jnana
and bhakti are all one, and that man can attain God even in this life. He does
not believe in disciples, though many claim to be his disciples. He does not
advise practice of yoga, or even silence, though he has practised both.
Concentrating on silence as a muni, he has begun to teach as a rishi.
To a man who stated that he could not understand the world at all,
Sri Ramana replied, “As you are, so is this world. Without understanding
yourself, what is the use of trying to understand the world?” To another
individual, who asked the Maharshi persistently, “Why is God so unjust?”
The Maharshi’s cool retort was, “Why ask me? Go and ask Him?” On
being told that he could not go to Him to ask Him, the swift retort was,
“When you cannot reach Him, how can you question Him?”
We are indeed lucky in having the Maharshi in our midst. It
will be a thousand pities if a spiritual dynamo like that of Sri Ramana is not
utilised to its fullest extent. He requires no permission; he charges no fee;
he does not require conformity to any dogma. He is like the rivers and
mountains, the common property of mankind.\n--- 第73页 ---\nT.M.P. Mahadevan 51
25
Prof. T.M.P. Mahadevan, M.A., Ph.D., was Head, Dept. of
Philosophy, Madras University.
We hear of Shuka and Yajnavalkya; and we read of Gaudapada
and Sankara. But here we have before our eyes a contemporary witness
to the Eternal Truth of the Vedanta, an eloquent commentary on the
Upanishads. We for the most part seem to be so small in his presence,
bound as we are in the coils of time.
The Maharshi tells that we will never get at Reality if we take the
appearance to be real: the dream world appears all too real to us so long as
we are in it; but as soon as we are awake, we realise its unsubstantiality.
The Maharshi seldom talks. He believes that the Self is best taught
in silence. He says, “Silence is ever speaking, it is the perennial flow of
language.” For the benefit of those who cannot understand the language
of Silence, the Maharshi sometimes talks, but he warns at the same time
that questions and answers lie within the region of avidya. Till the dawn of
wisdom, doubts will necessarily arise. Once the Self is realised there will
be no problem to be solved.
The Maharshi’s method of Self-enquiry ends in mental suicide; it
provides an instrument whereby the mind destroys itself, thus revealing the
Self. The Maharshi directs us to put ourselves the question, ‘Who am I?’
But this is not an empty formula or a barren mantra to be muttered. Patient,
intelligent and unsparing effort is required before progress could be
registered on this arduous journey.
The Maharshi teaches that the Heart, on the right side of the
chest, is the seat of the Self. He makes it very clear that any reference to
the physical body is only from the empirical point of view. From the absolute
standpoint it is impossible to locate the Heart or Self in any place either
inside the body or outside. So, when any particular part of the body is
spoken of as the seat of the Self, it is so described only as an aid to the
layman’s understanding.
It would not be possible to realise the Self, if there is attachment to
the objects of senses. The Maharshi told a grihastha (who was tormented
by the thought that this was a despicable position, unhelpful to spiritual
achievement): “Whether you continue in the household or renounce it and
go to the forest, your mind haunts you. The obstacle is the mind; it must be\n--- 第74页 ---\n52 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
got over whether in the home or in the forest.” These words, however,
should be interpreted with great care. They were given in an answer to a
grihastha who was trying to assess the relative value of his own asrama
and sannyasa. If he was really keen on renunciation, he would not have
argued or hesitated. One who feels the burning heat of a red-hot iron rod
does not take even the space of a moment to let go his hold of it.
When I first saw the Master, his head had begun to nod. The
shaking head seemed to me saying ‘neti’, ‘neti’, (not this, not this). Many
who came with long list of questions used to depart in silence after sitting
for a while in the Master’s presence. When he chose to answer questions,
each sentence was like a text from the Upanishad, so full of meaning that
it required calm, silent pondering over in order to be understood fully.
Having been a student of the Gita since childhood I saw in Bhagavan
a vivid and living commentary on that great scripture. In 1948-49, during my
lecture tour of the United States, I often said that if there was anyone living
in India answering to the truth of the Vedanta, it was Ramana Maharshi.
The critics of advaita usually say that the advaitin is an austere
intellectual in whom the wells of feeling have all dried up. Those who have
seen the Master will know how unfounded such a criticism is. Sri Ramana
was ever brimming with the milk of divine kindness. Even members of the
subhuman species had their share of the unbounded love of the Master.
He was a consummate artist in life. Anything that he touched became
orderly and pleasant.1
1. The write-up, except the last three paras, was written in collaboration with
Swami Rajeswarananda, no. 97.
26
Duncan Greenlees, M.A. (Oxon.), a scholar and a Theosophist,
visited India on a teaching assignment in the 1930s.
The writer who first felt repelled after reading about the greatness of
Sri Ramana in A Search in Secret India by British journalist Brunton
(no.1), says:
The book struck me somehow as a piece of journalism of the
lower kind. For a few days it almost dissuaded me from going to
Tiruvannamalai. Had the Maharshi stooped to allow this kind of vulgar\n--- 第75页 ---\nDuncan Greenlees 53
advertisement for himself, almost like a quack doctor seeking testimonials?
Of course, I soon threw this foolishness off my mind, and went to see for
myself.
I saw the Maharshi. It did not take long for me to be sure that I
was in front of one who had, in that very body, solved life’s problem for
himself. The radiant peace around him proved it beyond all cavil. The
calm, like that of the midnight sky, was something too real to
question for a moment. The part of my search thus was over, even
at the first glimpse. In a flash I had seen a ‘Master’. I knew he was
what the books call a jivanmukta. Please don’t ask me how I knew for I
cannot answer that. It was just as one knows that water is wet and the sky
is blue. It could not be denied – self-evident is the word.
I had brought the usual list of questions to be asked. Shyness kept
me silent while sitting in the Hall during those first days. And before I
broke that silence, the unspoken questions had solved themselves in their
own irrelevance. It was a common experience; I only add my own testimony
to that of many others. Before I left that hallowed spot, I did put questions
to the Maharshi, which were answered in a wonderful way that was new
to me. I was wholly satisfied and filled with joy.
The four days I had planned were soon over. But I could not tear
myself away before the last date of the vacation [of the educational
institution where he was teaching], and stayed on, delighted, enthralled and
pacified. That stillness of eternal depths had somehow seeped itself into
my heart. I had met a Master who could quell the waves with a silent
word, ‘Peace, be still!’ I knew myself to be absolutely one with that incarnate
Peace on the sofa, and therefore to be one equally with the Unmanifest in
whose stillness he was so obviously poised.
God’s grace is such that He gives at His will what He likes to give
to any soul. We cannot earn His grace, even by crores of years of effort.
One can never be worthy of His blessings, but receives it purely out of His
mercy. His darshan can never be the fruit of sakama tapasya, whatever
certain books may say. It is only the overflowing love of the Lord that
brings Him to us.
The peace that Bhagavan had put upon me remained in my heart,
like a shining cloud of transparency through which all things passed dreamlike
for about three weeks. The mind was caught and held in that peace in
a blissfulness it had never known before. It is a pity I cannot bring
about this mood at my own will: it can come only from the touch of
the real Teacher of souls, as I have found.\n--- 第76页 ---\n54 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
One day in the Hall I was browsing a notebook of extracts on
yoga. Bhagavan hardly ever spoke to me first (indeed there was very little
actual talking between us during the years; it did not seem necessary,
somehow), but that day he spoke to me in English: “What is that book?” I
answered him. He said quietly, “Read Milarepa”.1 I read the book; it thrilled
and stirred deep places in my heart. Somehow, I feel Bhagavan had seen
that it would be so and therefore gave me the only order of the sort he had
ever given me.
I have taken all the descriptions of the jivanmukta I could find in any
scripture – Hindu, Buddhist, Confucian, Christian, Muslim, Jain etc. I have
watched Bhagavan under all kinds of circumstances, and checked up what I
have seen with those descriptions. I have not the smallest doubt that he alone,
of the men I have seen, dwells always in sahaja samadhi. Of course, I am not
qualified to judge, for none but the saint can know the saint.
I have seen him in a humorous mood. I have seen him play the
host with delicate grace that seemed almost awkward at times. I have
seen him quickly, motionlessly, challenging and defeating injustice or
unkindness. I have seen him cutting vegetables for the Ashramites long
before the dawn. I have seen again and again how he solved the doubts,
the agonies, the loss of faith of people of many types – often with a word,
often with his healing silence and a soft distance in his unmoving gaze. I
have looked at his perfect handwriting in many scripts, all a model of beauty
and care. I have heard him correcting the singers of hymns in his own
glory, with an absolute impersonality that was obvious.
I have watched his reactions to the noisy devotee, the lazy worker,
the mischievous monkey, the crazed adorer, the over-bold flatterer, the one
who would exploit his name. I have seen how totally impervious he was to
all considerations of power, place, prestige, and how his grace shined equally
on prince and peasant. Then, can I doubt that here indeed we have, if
not God Himself – for He is omnipresent – at least Greatness
incarnate, the majesty of the ancient hills blending with the
sweetness of the evening star?
Sit before him, as we used to sit those summer evenings, and we
knew that we were not that foolish excited little person sitting there, but the
eternal Self out of whom this world has spun its cobweb yarn of forms.
I know no other man whose mere presence has thus enabled
me to make the personality drop down in the abyss of nothingness,
where it belongs. I have found no other human being who so emanates
his grace that it can catch away the ordinary man from his stillness
and plunge him deep in the ecstasy of timeless omnipresent being.\n--- 第77页 ---\nDuncan Greenlees 55
His grace, which of course is the grace of God whose
representative and messenger he is, has been enough to give brief glimpses
even to me of that infinity, wherein he always seemed to live.
He will brush away all this nonsense of my talk with a wave of
hand and a smile, while saying as he once did, “It is the same in this and
in another place. That bliss you feel is in the Self, and you superimpose
it upon the place or environment in which you are bodily set.” But,
Bhagavan, we say what we like about you and the blessings we have
received from you; we shall not let you interrupt our foolish words. It is
our chance to publicly proclaim our debt to the silent Teacher of
Tiruvannamalai.
Those who are in the Ashram are very gentle, considerate and
kindly. The generous services were given by a friend who used to
translate for me the Tamil answers to my English questions and got
translations approved by Bhagavan himself before giving them to me.
Even the human hospitality of Bhagavan himself, though sometimes a
little embarrassing to my innate shyness perhaps, was always a delightful
thing.
His very presence among us is a benediction. His attaining
a clear and unflickering vision of the Self has raised the whole world
a little nearer to the Truth. His words have been an unfathomed ocean
of comfort and inspiration to thousands. His silent peacefulness has revealed
the Eternal in human form, as mountains, seas and skies above can usually
reveal It.
The following was written after the Maharshi’s mahanirvana:
Can we say he is dead? Bhagavan dead? The word could have
no meaning. How can he who lives in the entire universe ever taste of
death? “You think I am going away? But where am I to go? I shall
remain here with you.” That was his promise while he was preparing
us for separation. And those of us who lived in Tiruvannamalai hold
firmly to the faith, which we feel confirmed by continual experience,
that he has kept that promise and is still to be contacted here in the
Ashram as of old.
Like Surdas2 darkening the physical sight so that he might see
clearly the light within, he has dimmed our outer sight so that the inner
vision might be filled with his eternal light. He has veiled the outer form we
loved so well, that its beauty might no longer draw our gaze away from the
everlasting presence enthroned in our inmost Heart. His Light shines, with
the everlasting clarity of God’s own Light.\n--- 第78页 ---\n56 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Extracts from his poem:
Sri Arunachala Ramana
Crowds gather always at His flower-feet,
The fragrant blossom does not seek the bee,
Its essence floats upon the waiting air,
And fainting creatures hasten to the Source,
To lose themselves within the sweetness hid
Deep in its resting Heart, and there to swoon
Away in all-transcending endless bliss.
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
O Siva-Yogi, Mighty God, to Thee,
Incarnate in this Silent One, whose gaze
Can shrivel at a glance dark Passion, and
The clouds of ignorance that swirl around.
The ever-blissful and all-seeing Self,
To Thee we offer flowers of our desire.
Inspire within our hearts the soaring Flame
That burns each Kartik on this Glory-hill.
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
Oh Arunachala, Reveal the one
The only Being Immanent, the Self
Within the dreaming self. Strike down our fears,
And in our eager souls drop quietly
The fragrant dews of the One Guru’s grace,
Till at their magic touch all bonds decay, –
Sivatma reigning, Sea of motionless Peace,
Still as the rocks of Arunagiri.
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
Stayed in Heart of Arunachala
Is Lord of Silence and Self of all.
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
1. Dr. Evans-Wentz’s book Tibet’s Great Yogi Milarepa.
2. Famous Hindi poet who is reputed to have made himself blind.\n--- 第79页 ---\nH. Ghosh / C.S. Bagi 57
27
H. Ghosh, M.A., was Principal of Holkar College, Indore, Madhya
Pradesh.
When I first had the good fortune of being introduced to the Great
Sage of Arunachala, my imagination was struck by the austerity and
simplicity of his sublime countenance. This austerity is indelibly marked on
his face and cannot escape the attention of even a casual observer. One
great outcome of this austere simplicity is humbleness of the mind.
We are enjoined by the Maharshi to forsake, once and forever,
our petty selves and to approach our divine self. The noblest pursuit,
according to the Maharshi, is the pursuit of our Overself. The joys are
perennial and the pursuit eternal.
Sri Bhagavan is not a mere mystic. He does not look into some
future world, but gazes intently on what is real and eternal in him. Heaven
to him is not a far-off place: here in your heart and nowhere, the soul of all
things is to be found. Only those who have put away all selfish longings
may see clearly the radiance of happiness. Something of this happiness the
worst sinners among us will feel in the presence of this exalted and self-
illumined Sage of Arunachala.
Many devotees go to Sri Bhagavan for a miraculous cure of their
physical ailments or for a wondrous change in their worldly destiny. Sri
Bhagavan rightly warns us against the allurements of miracles or
clairvoyance or prophetic powers. But if anyone invokes Him in a spirit of
absolute trust, his prayers will be answered.
In all humility I confess that I am the least competent to write
about Sri Bhagavan. The finite can never know the Infinite and the Illimitable.
A silent look or an encouraging word from Him will do much more
good than all the sermonic literature of the world.
28
C.S. Bagi, M.A., was Principal of Lingaraj College, Belgaum,
Karnataka.
Sri Bhagavan’s existence and operations being mysteries, their
explanations can have no finality. In explaining one mystery we straightaway\n--- 第80页 ---\n58 Face to Face with Sri Ramana Maharshi
land ourselves in others equally, if not more perplexing. It is easy to
remember but impossible to know Sri Bhagavan.
Every man judges Sri Bhagavan by the measure of his own self.
But no judgement of him can be right unless the judge transcends himself.
Sri Bhagavan is the Immutable Law. His greatness is in preserving the
Law and not in playing juggler’s tricks of turning cocks into bulls and vice
versa. Every adjective we employ in describing Him does more
justice to our own sentiments with regard to Him than His with
regard to Himself. He is not the duality we are. But this is certain:
whether indifferent or sympathetic, in either case the world gains
by Him as it does from skies whether they are sulky or sunny.
Mysterious are His ways with men. Though nothing unusual happens
at the time of darshan to a curious pilgrim, a mild surprise overtakes him
later when he begins to note subtle proclivities in his mode of living and
thinking – nay, perhaps in external affairs too. Sins of whole lives are
forgiven by one act of His Grace. Faith and hope are the only price
the sinner pays for His forgiveness.
Sri Bhagavan’s life is a demonstration of the great potentials that
lie hidden in the most ordinary and unpromising souls. We learn from Him
what self-deceived shadows we are all, entombed in toiling body-minds –
mere fantasies of a narrow dream called life. The wary of us will question
themselves, ‘Is this life a toilsome delusion?’ Who is to blame? Should we
not rather blame ourselves who take the delusion seriously, when our better
judgement asks us to wake up?
‘Know thyself’ is the burden of Sri Bhagavan’s teaching as it is
the breath of His being. As a process it is the persistent inquiry into the
uninquiring self. The question ‘Who Am I’ is a razor’s edge and cuts through
all other questions that earthly imagination may conceive. All questions
resolve themselves into it. Who Am I? is the question of questions and
goes directly to the root of every problem and sums up the entire spirit of
quest.
The mind seems to conspire against itself. The limpid stream of
pure consciousness called ‘I’ is contaminated by throwing into it the rubbish
of not-‘I’.We are a stranger to ourself by claiming everything ours except
ourself.
We surrender our judgement to Sri Bhagavan whose life has been
to us a reassurance against gloom and despair. May His pleasure be our
aim in what we think and talk, and His remembrance in what we do. He
knows all our errors and sins. We err even to ask for deliverance. May His
Grace be everywhere!