\n--- 第1页 ---\nGEMS
FROM BHAGAVAN
A necklace of sayings by
BHAGAVAN SRI RAMANA MAHARSHI
on various vital subjects
Strung together by
A. DEVARAJA MUDALIAR
AUTHOR OF
Day by day with Bhagavan
Fifth Edition
1999\n--- 第2页 ---\n2
© Sri Ramanasramam
Fifth Edition: 1999
First Edition: 1965
PREFACE
I have been, for some time now, seriously considering
that a book containing, within a small compass, all the most
Published by:
important of Bhagavan’s teachings would be a real desideratum,
V. S. Ramanan
Sri Ramanasramam and if I seek to supply it in my own way, according to my light
Tiruvannamalai and to the best of my ability, the small service I thereby render
S. India 606 603 may be of use to readers in general, and Bhagavan’s devotees
in particular. It may even be acceptable to Bhagavan as His
child’s efforts to do something good and useful. This is my
only excuse for this book.
Typeset at:
A. DEVARAJA MUDALIAR
Sri Ramanasramam
Printed by:\n--- 第3页 ---\n4
I. HAppINeSS ...................................................5
II. THe Self ANd NoN-Self ..............................
8
III. MINd .........................................................15
IV. ‘WHo AM I?’ — eNquIRy ...........................18
V. SuRReNdeR ................................................24
VI. THe THRee STATeS .....................................27
VII. GRAce ANd GuRu ......................................29
VIII. Self-ReAlIzATIoN ......................................32
IX. HeART........................................................42
X. ReNuNcIATIoN ............................................45
XI. fATe ANd fReeWIll ...................................49
XII. JNANI .........................................................51
Sri Ramana Maharshi
XIII. MIScellANeouS .........................................55\n--- 第4页 ---\n6
pains and pleasures are not due to facts but to our concepts. I
Two young men of a village went on a pilgrimage to North
India. One of them died there. But the other having picked up
HAPPINESS
some job decided to return to his village only after some time.
Meanwhile he came across a wandering pilgrim and sent word
All beings desire happiness always, happiness without a
through him to his village about himself and his dead friend.
tinge of sorrow. At the same time everybody loves himself
The pilgrim conveyed the news and in doing so inadvertently
best. The cause for love is only happiness. So, that happiness
changed the names of the living and the dead man. The result
must lie within oneself. Further, that happiness is daily
was that the dead man’s people were rejoicing that he was
experienced by everyone in sleep when there is no mind. To
doing well and the living man’s people were in grief that he
attain that natural happiness one must know oneself. For that,
was dead.
Self-enquiry, ‘Who am I?’ is the chief means.
I used to sit on the floor and lie on the ground. No cloth
Happiness is the nature of the Self. They are not different.
spread out. That is freedom. The sofa is a bondage. It is jail for
The only happiness there is, is of the Self. That is the truth.
me. I am not allowed to sit where and how I please. Is it not
There is no happiness in worldly objects. Because of our
bondage? One must be free to do as one pleases and should
ignorance we imagine we derive happiness from them.
not be served by others. ‘No want’ is the greatest bliss. It can
If, as a man generally imagines, his happiness is due to
be realized only by experience. Even an emperor is no match
external causes, it is reasonable to conclude that his happiness
for a man with no wants.
must increase with the increase of possessions and diminish
in proportion to their diminution. Therefore, if he is devoid
of possessions his happiness should be nil. What, however,
is the real experience of man? Does it confirm this view? In
deep sleep the man is devoid of all possessions, including
his own body. Instead of being unhappy he is quite happy.
Everyone desires to sleep soundly. The conclusion therefore
is that happiness is inherent in man and is not due to external
causes. One must realize his Self in order to open the store of
unalloyed happiness.
II
There is a story in Panchadasi, which illustrates that our\n--- 第5页 ---\n8
you see depends on the seer. Apart from the seer there is no
seen.’ This is called drishti-srishti vada, or the argument that
THE SELF AND NON-SELF:
one first creates out of his mind and then sees what his mind
THE REALITY AND THE WORLD
itself has created.
To those who cannot grasp even this and who further
Existence or Consciousness is the only reality.
argue, ‘The dream experience is so short, while the world
Consciousness plus waking we call waking. Consciousness
always exists. The dream experience was limited to me. But
plus sleep we call sleep. Consciousness plus dream we call
the world is felt and seen not only by me but by so many and
dream. Consciousness is the screen on which all the pictures
we cannot call such a world nonexistent,’ the argument called
come and go. The screen is real, the pictures are mere shadows
srishti-drishti vada is addressed and they are told, ‘God first
on it.
created such and such a thing out of such and such an element
The Self and the appearances therein, as the snake in
and then something else and so forth.’ That alone will satisfy
the rope, can be well illustrated like this. There is a screen.
them. Their minds are not otherwise satisfied and they ask
On that screen first appears the figure of a king. He sits on
themselves, ‘How can all geography, all maps, all sciences,
a throne. Then before him on that same screen a play begins
stars, planets and the rules governing or relating to them, and
with various figures and objects, and the king on the screen
all knowledge be totally untrue?’ To such it is best to say, ‘Yes.
watches the play on the same screen. The seer and the seen
God created all this and so you see it.’ All these are only to
are mere shadows on the screen which is the only reality,
suit the capacity of the hearers. The absolute can only be one.
supporting all the pictures. In the world also, the seer and the
There is first the white light, so to call it, of the Self,
seen together constitute the mind, and the mind is supported
which transcends both light and darkness. In it no object can
by or based on the Self.
be seen. There is neither seer nor seen. Then there is also total
The ajata school of Advaita says, ‘Nothing exists except
darkness (avidya) in which no objects are seen. But from the
the one reality. There is no birth or death, no projection or
Self proceeds a reflected light, the light of pure mind (manas),
drawing in, no sadhaka (aspirant), no mumukshu (one who
and it is this light which gives room for the existence of all
desires to be liberated), no mukta (one who is liberated), no
the film of the world, which is seen neither in total light nor
bondage, no liberation. The One Unity alone exists forever.’
in total darkness, but only in the subdued or reflected light.
To those who find it difficult to grasp this truth and ask, ‘How
From the point of view of Jnana (Knowledge) or the
can we ignore this solid world we see all around us?’ the
Reality, the pain seen in the world is certainly a dream, as
dream experience is pointed out and they are told, ‘All that\n--- 第6页 ---\n10
six questions on maya. They are instructive: is the world, of which any particular pain like hunger is an
1. What is maya? The answer is: It is anirvachaniya or infinitesimal part. In the dream also you yourself feel hunger.
indescribable. You see others suffering from hunger. You feed yourself, and
2. To whom does it come? The answer is: To the mind moved by pity feed the others whom you find suffering from
or ego who feels that he is a separate entity, who thinks ‘I do hunger. So long as the dream lasted, all those pains were as
this’ or ‘This is mine’. real as you now think the pain in the world to be. It was only
3. Where does it come from and how did it originate? The when you woke up that you discovered that the pain in the
answer: Nobody can say. dream was unreal. You might have eaten to the full and gone
4. How did it arise? The answer is: Through non-vichara, to sleep. You dream that you work hard and long in the hot
through failure to enquire ‘Who am I?’ sun all day, are tired and hungry and want to eat a lot. Then
5. If the Self and maya both exist, does this not invalidate you wake up and find your stomach is full and you have not
the theory of Advaita? The answer is: It need not, since maya stirred out of your bed. But this does not mean that while
is dependent on the Self as the picture is on the screen. The you are in the dream you can act as if the pain you feel is not
picture is not real in the sense that the screen is real. real. The hunger in the dream has to be assuaged by the food
6. If the Self and maya are one, could it not be argued that in the dream. The fellow beings you found so hungry in the
the Self is of the nature of maya and that it is also illusory? dream had to be provided with food in that dream. You can
The answer is: No, the Self can be capable of producing never mix up the two states, the dream and the waking state.
illusion without being illusory. A conjuror may create for Till you reach the state of jnana and thus wake out of maya
our entertainment the illusion of people, animals and things, you must do social service by relieving suffering whenever
and we see all of them as clearly as we see him, but after the you see it. But even then you must do it without ahankara,
performance he alone remains and all the visions he created i.e., without the sense of ‘I am the doer’, but with the feeling
have disappeared. He is not a part of the vision but solid and ‘I am the Lord’s tool’. Similarly one must not be conceited
real. by thinking, ‘I am helping a man below me. He needs help.
The books use the following illustration to help explain I am in a position to help. I am superior and he inferior.’ But
creation: The Self is like the canvas for a painting. First a paste you must help the man as a means of worshipping God in that
is smeared over it to close the small holes that are in the canvas. man. All such service is for the Self and not for anybody else.
This paste can be compared to the Antaryamin (Indweller) in You are not helping anybody else, but only yourself.
all creation. Then the artist makes an outline on the canvas. The book Kaivalya Navaneeta has asked and answered\n--- 第7页 ---\n12
nothing, there is always the light of Consciousness or Self, This can be compared to the sukshma sarira (subtle body)
like the hall lamp which is always burning. The thing to do of all creatures; for instance, the light and sound (bindu and
is to concentrate on the seer and not on the seen, not on the nada) out of which all things arise. Within this outline the artist
objects, but on the Light which reveals them. paints his picture with colours, etc., and this can be compared
Questions about the reality of the world, and about the to the gross forms that constitute the world.
existence of pain or evil in the world, will all cease when you Vedanta says that the cosmos springs into view
enquire ‘Who am I?’ and find out the seer. Without a seer the simultaneously with the seer. There is no creation by stages
world and the evils thereof alleged do not exist. or steps. It is similar to the creation in dream where the
The world is of the form of the five categories of sense experiencer and the objects of experience come into existence
objects, and nothing else. These five kinds of objects are sensed at the same time. To those who are not satisfied with this
by the five senses. As all are perceived by the mind through explanation, theories of gradual creation are offered in books.
these five senses, the world is nothing but the mind. Is there It is not at all correct to say that advaitins of the Sankara
a world apart from the mind? school deny the existence of the world, or that they call it
Though the world and consciousness emerge and disappear unreal. On the other hand, it is more real to them than to
together, the world shines or is perceived only through others. Their world will always exist whereas the world of the
consciousness. That source wherein both these arise and other schools will have origin, growth and decay, and as such
disappear, and which itself neither appears nor disappears, is cannot be real. They only say that the world as ‘world’ is not
the perfect Reality. real, but that the world as Brahman is real. All is Brahman,
If the mind, the source of all knowledge and activity nothing exists but Brahman, and the world as Brahman is real.
subsides, the vision of the world will cease. Just as knowledge The Self is the one Reality that always exists, and it is by
of the real rope does not dawn till the fancied notion of the the light of the Self that all other things are seen. We forget it
serpent disappears, vision (experience) of the Reality cannot and concentrate on the appearance. The light in the hall burns
be gained unless the superimposed vision of the universe is both when persons are enacting something, as in a theatre, and
abandoned. when nothing is being enacted. It is the light which enables us
That which really exists is only the Self. The world, jiva to see the hall, the persons and the acting. We are so engrossed
(individual self) and Iswara (God) are mental creations, like with the objects or appearances revealed by the light, that we
the appearance of silver in mother of pearl. All these appear pay no attention to the light. In the waking or dream state in
at the same time and disappear similarly. The Self alone is the which things appear, and in the sleep state in which we see\n--- 第8页 ---\n14
III world, the ego and Iswara.
To the jnani it is immaterial whether the world appears or
not. Whether it appears or not, his attention is always on the
MIND
Self. Take the letters and the paper on which they are printed.
You are wholly engrossed with the letters and have no attention
Mind is a wonderful force inherent in the Self.
left for the paper. But the jnani thinks only of the paper as the
That which rises in this body as ‘I’ is the mind.
real substratum, whether the letters appear or not.
When the subtle mind emerges through the brain and
You make all kinds of sweets from various ingredients
the senses, the gross names and forms are cognized. When it
and in various shapes, and they all taste sweet because there
remains in the Heart, names and forms disappear.... If the mind
is sugar in all of them, and sweetness is the nature of sugar. In
remains in the Heart, the ‘I’ or the ego which is the source of
the same way, all experiences and the absence of them contain
all thoughts will go, and the Self, the Real, Eternal ‘I’ alone
the illumination, which is the nature of the Self. Without the
will shine. Where there is not the slightest trace of the ego,
Self they cannot be experienced, just as without sugar not one
there is the Self.
of the articles you make can taste sweet.
Mind and breath have the same source. Hence breath is
The Immanent Being is called Iswara. Immanence can
controlled when mind is controlled and mind when breath is
only be with maya. It (Iswara) is the Knowledge of Being
controlled. Breath is the gross form of the mind.
along with maya. From the subtle conceit Hiranyagarbha
Pranayama (breath control) is only an aid to subdue the
rises; from Hiranyagarbha the gross, concrete Virat rises.
mind and will not serve to kill it.
Chit-Atma is pure Being only.
Like pranayama, worship of a deity, japa (repetition) with
As regards the existence of pain in the world, the wise one
a mantra, strict regulation of diet are all aids for mind control.
explains from his experience, that if one withdraws within the
Control of breath (pranayama) may be internal or
Self there is an end of all pain. The pain is felt so long as the
external. The internal is as follows: Naham (the idea I am
object is different from oneself. But when the Self is found to
not the body) is rechaka (exhalation), Koham (Who am I?) is
be an undivided whole, who and what is there to feel?
puraka (inhalation), Soham (I am He) is kumbhaka (retention
The Upanishadic text ‘I am Brahman’ only means Brahman
of breath). Doing this, the breath becomes automatically
exists as ‘I’.
controlled. External pranayama is for one not endowed with
strength to control the mind. There is no way so sure as control
of mind. Pranayama need not be exactly as prescribed in hatha\n--- 第9页 ---\n16
separated; and it is the same with the illumination and the yoga. If engaged in japa, dhyana (meditation), bhakti, etc., just
mind that unite to form the ego. The following illustration is a little control of breath will suffice to control the mind. The
given in the books: The lamp in the theatre is Para Brahman mind is the rider and breath the horse. Pranayama is a check
or illumination. It illuminates itself, the stage and the actors. on the horse. By that check the rider is checked. Pranayama
We see the stage and the actors by its light, but the light still may be done just a little. To watch the breath is one way of
continues when there is no more play. Another illustration is doing it. The mind is drawn away from other activities by being
an iron rod that is compared to the mind. Fire joins it and it engaged in watching the breath. That controls the breath, and
becomes red hot. It glows and can burn things like fire, but the mind in its turn is also controlled. If rechaka and puraka
still it has a definite shape unlike fire. If we hammer it, it is the are found difficult to practise, retention of breath alone for a
rod that receives the blow, not the fire. The rod is the jivatman, short while may be practised while in japa, dhyana, etc. That
the fire the Self or Paramatman. The mind can do nothing by too will yield good results.
itself. It emerges only with the illumination and can do no There is no other way of controlling the mind except as
action good or bad, except with the illumination. But while prescribed in the books like the Gita, drawing in the mind as
the illumination is always there, enabling the mind to act well often as it strays or goes outward, and fixing it in the Self.
or ill, the pleasure or pain resulting from such action is not felt Of course it will not be easy to do it. It will come only with
by the illumination, just as when you hammer a red hot iron it practice or sadhana.
is not the fire but the iron that gets the hammering. God illumines the mind and shines within it. One cannot
If we control the mind, it does not matter where we live. know God by means of the mind. One can but turn the mind
inwards and merge it in God.
The body composed of insentient matter cannot say ‘I’ (i.e.,
cannot be the cause of the ‘I- thought’). On the other hand,
the Eternal Consciousness cannot have such a thing as birth.
Between the two something arises within the dimensions of
the body. This is the knot of matter and Consciousness (chit-
jada-granthi), variously called bondage, jiva, subtle body, ego,
samsara (attachment), mind, etc.
Bhagavan pointed to his towel and said, ‘We call this
IV a white cloth, but the cloth and its whiteness cannot be\n--- 第10页 ---\n18
pursue meditation of Self. He is then sure to succeed.
If the ego is present, all else will also exist. If it is absent,
“WHO AM I?” - ENQUIRY
all else will also vanish. As ego is all this, to enquire what this
ego is, is to give up all attachment.
For all thoughts the source is the ‘I-thought’. The mind will
Controlling speech and breath, and diving deep within
merge only by Self-enquiry ‘Who am I?’ The thought ‘Who
oneself, as a man dives into water to recover something that
am l?’ will destroy all other thoughts and finally kill itself
has fallen there, one must find out the source whence the ego
also. If other thoughts arise, without trying to complete them,
rises, by means of keen insight.
one must enquire to whom did this thought arise. What does it
Enquiry, which constitutes the path of jnana, consists not
matter how many thoughts arise? As each thought arises one
in orally repeating ‘I’ ‘I’, but in searching by means of a deeply
must be watchful and ask to whom is this thought occurring.
introverted mind wherefrom the ‘I’ springs. To think ‘I am not
The answer will be ‘to me’. If you enquire ‘Who am I?’ the
this’ or ‘I am that’ may be of help in the enquiry, but cannot
mind will return to its source (or where it issued from). The
be the actual enquiry.
thought which arose will also submerge. As you practise like
When we quest within our mind ‘Who am I?’ and reach
this more and more, the power of the mind to remain at its
the Heart, ‘I’ topples down and immediately another entity will
source is increased.
reveal itself proclaiming ‘I-I’. Even though it also emerges
By means of a moderate quantity of satvic (pure) food,
saying ‘I’, it does not connote the ego, but the One Perfect
which is superior to all other rules and regulations of self
Existence.
discipline, the satvic or pure quality of the mind will grow
If we unceasingly investigate the form of the mind, we
and Self-enquiry will be helped.
find there is no such thing as the mind. This is the direct path
Though ancient and timeless sense attachments in the
open to all.
shape of vasanas (subtle tendencies) may rise countless like
Thoughts alone constitute the mind, and for all thoughts
the waves of the sea, they will all be destroyed as dhyana
the base or source is the ‘I-thought’. ‘I’ is the mind. If we go
progresses. Without giving any room for doubt whether it
inward questing for the source of the ‘I’, the ‘I’ topples down.
would at all be possible to eradicate all those vasanas and be
This is the jnana enquiry.
the Self alone, one must take hold ceaselessly of dhyana of the
Where the ‘I’ merges, another entity emerges as ‘I-I’ of its
Self. However great a sinner one may be, instead of lamenting
own accord. That is the Perfect Self.
‘I am a great sinner, how can I make any progress?’ one must
There is no use removing doubts. If we clear one doubt
completely forget the fact of being a sinner and earnestly\n--- 第11页 ---\n20
policeman. He will go with you and pretend to catch the thief, another arises and there will be no end of doubts. All doubts
but nothing will be gained. So you must turn inward, and see will cease only when the doubter and his source have been
from whence the mind rises and then it will cease to exist. found. Seek for the source of the doubter, and you find he is
Breath and mind arise from the same source and when one really nonexistent. Doubter ceasing, doubts will cease.
of them is controlled the other is also controlled. As a matter Reality being yourself, there is nothing for you to realize.
of fact, in the quest method - which is more correctly ‘Whence All are regarding the unreal as real. What is required is that
am I?’ and not merely ‘Who am I?’ - we are not simply trying you give up regarding the unreal as real. The object of all
to eliminate, saying ‘We are not the body, nor the senses and meditation (dhyana) or japa is only that, to give up all thoughts
so on’, to reach what remains as the ultimate reality, but we regarding the non-self, to give up many thoughts and to hold
are trying to find out whence the ‘I-thought’ or the ego arises on to one thought. The object of all sadhana is to make the
within us. The method contains within it, though implicitly mind one-pointed, to concentrate it on one thought and thus
and not expressly, the watching of the breath. When we watch exclude our many thoughts. If we do this, eventually even
wherefrom the ‘I-thought’ arises, we are necessarily watching the one thought will go and the mind will get extinguished
the source of breath also, as the ‘I-thought’ and the breath arise in its source.
from the same source. When we enquire within ‘Who am I?’ the ‘I’ investigated
Breath control may do as an aid but can never by itself is the ego. It is that which makes vichara (enquiry) also. The
lead to the goal. While doing it mechanically, take care to be Self has no vichara. That which makes the enquiry is the ego.
alert in mind and to remember the ‘I- thought’ and the quest The ‘I’ about which the enquiry is made is also the ego. As
for its source. Then you will find that where the breath sinks, the result of the enquiry the ego ceases to exist and only the
there the ‘I-thought’ arises. They sink and arise together. The Self is found to exist.
‘I-thought’ will also sink along with the breath. What is the best way of killing the ego? To each person
Simultaneously another luminous and infinite ‘I-I’ will that way is best which appears easiest or appeals the most.
emerge, and it will be continuous and unbroken. That is the All the ways are equally good, as they lead to the same goal,
goal. It goes by different names - God, Self, Kundalini, Shakti, which is the merging of the ego in the Self. What the bhakta
Consciousness, etc. calls surrender, the man who does vichara calls jnana. Both
Who am I?’ is not a mantra. It means that you must find are trying to take the ego back to the source from which it
out where in you the ‘I-thought’ arises, which is the source of sprang and make it merge there.
all other thoughts. But if you find that vichara marga (path To ask the mind to kill itself is like making the thief the\n--- 第12页 ---\n22
be asking, ‘Where?’ of enquiry) is too hard for you, you go on repeating ‘I-I’ and
Regulation of life, such as getting up at a fixed hour, that will lead you to the same goal. There is no harm in using
bathing, doing mantra-japa, etc., all this is for people who do ‘I’ as a mantra. It is the first name of God.
not feel drawn to Self-enquiry, or are not capable of it. But for I ask you to see where the ‘I’ arises in your body; but it is
those who can practise this method all rules and disciplines not really quite correct to say that the ‘I’ rises from and merges
are unnecessary. in the Heart on the right side of the chest. The Heart is another
Undoubtedly it is said in some books, that one should go name for the Reality, and it is neither inside nor outside the
on cultivating one good quality after another and thus prepare body. There can be no in and out for it, since It alone is. I
for moksha; but for those who follow the jnana or vichara do not mean by ‘Heart’ any physiological organ, any plexus
marga, their sadhana is itself quite enough for acquiring all of nerves or anything like that, but so long as one identifies
daivic (divine) qualities; they need not do anything else. oneself with the body and thinks he is the body, he is advised
What is Gayatri? It really means ‘Let me concentrate on to see in the body where the ‘I-thought’ rises and merges again.
That which illumines all’. It must be the Heart at the right side of the chest, since every
man of whatever race and religion and in whatever language
he may be saying ‘I’, points to the right side of his chest to
indicate himself. This is true all over the world. So that must
be the place. And by keenly watching the emergence of the
‘I-thought’ on waking and its subsiding in sleep, one can see
that it is in the Heart on the right side.
First know who you are. This requires no sastras (scripture)
or scholarship. This is simple experience. The state of being
is now and here all along. You have lost hold of yourself and
are asking others for guidance. The purpose of philosophy is
to turn the mind inward. “If you know yourself, no evil can
come to you. Because you asked me I have told you this” (see
Kaivalya Navaneeta). The ego comes up only holding you (the
Self). Hold yourself and the ego will vanish. Until then the
V sage will be happy saying, ‘There is’, and the ignorant will\n--- 第13页 ---\n24
The absence of thought is bhakti. It is also mukti.
Bhakti is Jnana Mata, i.e., the mother of jnana.
SURRENDER
It is asked, why all this creation so full of sorrow and evil.
All one can say is that it is God’s will, which is inscrutable. No
God will bear whatever burdens we put on Him. All things
motive, no desire, no end to achieve can be attributed to that
are being carried on by the omnipotent power of a Supreme
infinite, all-wise and all-powerful Being. God is untouched
God. Instead of submitting ourselves to It, why should we
by activities which take place in His presence. There is no
always be planning, ‘We should do this or that’. Knowing that
meaning in attributing responsibility and motive to the One,
the train carries all the load, why should we, travelling therein,
before it became many. But God’s will for the prescribed
suffer by carrying our small bundle on our heads, instead of
course of events is a good solution for the vexed question of
leaving it on the train and being happy.
free-will. If the mind is worried over what befalls us, or what
The story of Ashtavakra teaches that in order to experience
has been committed or omitted by us, it is wise to give up the
Brahma Jnana all that is necessary is to surrender yourself
sense of responsibility and free-will, by regarding ourselves as
completely to the Guru, to give up your notion of ‘I’ and
the ordained instruments of the All-Wise and the All-Powerful,
‘mine’. If these are surrendered, what remains is the Reality.
to do and suffer as He pleases. Then He bears all the burdens
There are two ways of achieving surrender. One is looking
and gives us peace.
into the source of the ‘I’ and merging into that source. The other
A Maharani told Bhagavan, ‘I am blessed with everything
is feeling, ‘I am helpless myself, God alone is all powerful,
that a human being would like to have’. Her Highness’s voice
and except by throwing myself completely on Him, there is no
choked. Controlling herself she continued slowly, ‘I have all
other means of safety for me’; and thus gradually developing
that I want, a human being may want... but... but... I do not have
the conviction that God alone exists and the ego does not count.
peace of mind. Something prevents it. Probably my destiny’.
Both methods lead to the same goal. Complete surrender is
There was silence for a while. Then Bhagavan spoke in his
another name for jnana or liberation.
usual sweet manner: ‘All right, you have said what you wished
Bhakti is not different from mukti. Bhakti is being as the
to say. Well, what is destiny? There is no destiny. Surrender,
Self. One is always That. He realizes It by the means he adopts.
and all will be well. Throw all responsibility on God and do
What is bhakti? To think of God. That means only one thought
not bear the burden yourself. What can destiny do to you then?’
prevails to the exclusion of all other thoughts. That thought
Devotee: Surrender is impossible.
is of God, which is the Self, or it is the self surrendered unto
Bhagavan: Yes, complete surrender is impossible. Partial
God. When He has taken you up, nothing else will assail you.\n--- 第14页 ---\n26
surrender is certainly possible for all. In course of time that
will lead to complete surrender. Well, if surrender is impossible
THE THREE STATES: WAKING,
what can be done? There is no peace of mind. You are helpless
DREAM AND SLEEP
to bring it about. It can be done only by surrender.
D: Partial surrender - well, can it undo destiny?
There is no difference between the dream and the waking
B: Oh yes, it can.
state except that the dream is short and the waking long. Both
D: Is not destiny due to past karma?
are the result of the mind. Our real state is called turiya, which
B: If one is surrendered to God, God will look to it.
is beyond the waking, dream and sleep states.
D: That being God’s dispensation, how does God undo it?
The Self alone exists and remains as It is. The three states
B: All are in Him only.
owe their existence to avichara (non-enquiry), and enquiry
To a devotee who was praying that she should have more
puts an end to them. However much one may explain, this
frequent visions of Siva, Bhagavan said, “Surrender to Him
fact will not become clear until one attains Self-realization,
and abide by His Will, whether He appears or disappears;
and wonders how he was blind to the self-evident and only
await His pleasure. If you ask Him to do as you like it is not
existence for so long.
surrender but command to God. You cannot have Him obey
All that we see is a dream, whether we see it in the dream
you and yet think you have surrendered. He knows what is
state or waking state. On account of some arbitrary standards
best and when and how to do it. His is the burden. You have
about the duration of the experience and so on, we call one
no longer any cares. All your cares are His. Such is surrender.
experience a dream and another waking experience. With
That is bhakti.”
reference to Reality both the experiences are unreal. A man
might have an experience such as getting anugraha (grace)
in his dream, and the effects and influence of it on his entire
subsequent life may be so profound and abiding, that one
cannot call it unreal - whilst calling real some trifling incident
in the waking life that just flits by, which is casual, of no
consequence and is soon forgotten. Once I had an experience,
a vision or a dream, whatever you may call it. I and some
VI
others, including Chadwick, had a walk on the hill. Returning,
we were walking along a huge street with great buildings on\n--- 第15页 ---\n28
either side. Pointing out the street and the buildings, I asked
Chadwick and others, whether anybody could say that what
GRACE AND GURU
we were seeing was a dream, and they all replied, ‘Which fool
will say so?’ We then walked along, entered the hall and the
I have not said that a Guru is not necessary. But a Guru
vision or dream ceased, or I woke up. What are we to call this?
need not always be in human form. First a person thinks that
Just before waking up from sleep, there is a very brief state,
he is inferior and that there is a superior, all-knowing, all
free from thought. That should be made permanent.
powerful God who controls his own and the world’s destiny
In dreamless sleep there is no world, no ego and no
and worships him or does bhakti. When he reaches a certain
unhappiness, but the Self remains. In the waking state there
stage and becomes fit for enlightenment, the same God whom
are all of these. Yet there is the Self. One has only to remove
he was worshipping comes as Guru and leads him onward.
the transitory happenings in order to realize the ever-present
That Guru comes only to tell him, ‘That God is within yourself.
beatitude of the Self.
Dive within and realize’. God, Guru and the Self are the same.
Your nature is bliss. Find that on which all the rest are
Realization is the result of the Master’s (Guru’s) grace,
imposed and you then remain as the pure Self.
more than teachings, lectures, meditations, etc. They are
In sleep there is no space or time. They are concepts,
only secondary aids, whereas the former is the primary and
which arise after the ‘I-thought’ has arisen. You are beyond
essential cause.
time and space. The ‘I-thought’ is the limited ‘I’. The real ‘I’
Guru’s grace is always there. You imagine it to be
is unlimited, universal, beyond time and space. Just while
something somewhere high up in the sky, far away and which
rising from sleep and before seeing the objective world, there
has to descend. It is really inside you in your Heart, and the
is a state of awareness which is your Pure Self. That must be
moment, by any of the methods, you effect subsidence or
known.
merger of the mind into its source, the grace rushes forth,
spouting as from a spring from within you.
Contact with jnanis is good. They will work through
silence. A Guru is not the physical form. Hence His contact
remains even after the physical form of the Guru vanishes.
After your bhakti to God has matured you, God comes
in the shape of a Guru and from outside pushes your mind
VII
inside, while being inside as Self He draws you there from\n--- 第16页 ---\n30
self-surrender. It acts from within, because God resides in the within. Such a Guru is needed generally, though not for very
Heart of all beings. Its whisper can be heard only in a mind rare and advanced souls.
purified by self-surrender and prayer. One can go to another Guru after one’s Guru passes away.
“Rationalists laugh at it, and atheists scorn it, but it exists. But after all, Gurus are one, as none of them are the form.
It is a descent of God into the soul’s zone of awareness. It is a Mental contact is always the best.
visitation of force unexpected and unpredictable. It is a voice Sat Sang means association with Sat or Reality. One
spoken out of cosmic silence - It is ‘Cosmic Will which can who knows or has realized Sat is also regarded as Sat. Such
perform authentic miracles under its own laws’.” association is absolutely necessary for all. Sankara has said,
In truth, God and the Guru are not different. Just as the “In all the three worlds there is no boat like sat sang to carry
prey which has fallen into the jaws of a tiger has no escape, so one safely across the ocean of births and deaths.”
those who have come within the ambit of the Guru’s gracious Guru not being physical, His contact will continue after His
look will be saved by the Guru and will not get lost; yet, each form vanishes. If one Jnani exists in the world, His influence
one should by his own effort pursue the path shown by God will be felt by or benefit all people in the world, and not simply
or Guru and gain release. His immediate disciples. As described in Vedanta Chudamani,
Each seeker after God should be allowed to go his own all the people in the world can be put under four categories:
way, the way for which he alone may be built (meant). It will The Guru’s disciples, bhaktas, those who are indifferent to Him
not do to convert him to another path by violence. The Guru and those who are hostile to Him. All these will be benefited
will go with the disciple in his own path and then gradually by the existence of the Jnani - each in his own way and to
turn him onto the Supreme path at the ripe moment. Suppose various degrees.
a car is going at top speed. To stop it at once or to turn it at From the book, Divine Grace Through Total Self-Surrender
once would be attended with disastrous consequences. by D. C. Desai, Bhagavan read out the following quotations
by Paul Brunton for our benefit:
“Divine Grace is a manifestation of the cosmic free will
in operation. It can alter the course of events in a mysterious
manner through its own unknown laws, which are superior to
all natural laws, and can modify the latter by interaction. It is
VIII the most powerful force in the universe.
“It descends and acts only when it is invoked by total\n--- 第17页 ---\n32
The real is as it is, ever. How to realize it? All that is required SELF-REALIZATION
is this: We have realized the unreal, i.e., regarded as Real what
is unreal. We have to give up this attitude. That is all that is
The state we call realization is simply being oneself, not
required for us to attain Jnana. We are not creating anything
knowing anything or becoming anything. If one has realized,
new or achieving something which we did not have before.
he is That which alone is, and which alone has always been.
The illustration given in the books is this: We dig a well and
He cannot describe that state. He can only be That. Of course
create a huge pit. The akasa (space) in the pit or well has not
we loosely talk of Self-realization for want of a better term.
been created by us. We have just removed the earth which
That which is, is peace. All that we need do is to keep
was filling the akasa there. The akasa was there, then, and is
quiet. Peace is our real nature. We spoil it. What is required is
also there now. Similarly we have simply to throw out all the
that we cease to spoil it. For instance, there is space in a hall
age-long samskaras (innate tendencies) which are inside us.
(room). We are not going to create space anew. We fill up the
When all of them have been given up, the Self will shine alone.
place with various articles. If we want space, all that we need
Effortless and choiceless awareness is our Real State.
do is to remove all those articles and we get space. Similarly,
If we can attain It or be in It, it is all right. But one cannot
if we remove all the rubbish from the mind the peace will
reach It without effort, the effort of deliberate meditation.
become manifest. That which is obstructing the peace must
All the age-long vasanas (latent tendencies) carry the mind
be removed. Peace is the only Reality.
outwards and turn it to external objects. All such thoughts
Mukti or Liberation is our Nature. It is another name for
have to be given up and the mind turned inward. For most
us. Our wanting mukti is a very funny thing. It is like a man
people effort is necessary. Of course, everybody, every book
who is in the shade voluntarily leaving the shade, going into
says Cm>ma-yIR (summa iru - be quiet or still). But it is not
the sun, feeling the severity of the heat, making great efforts
easy. That is why all this effort is necessary. Even if you find
to get back into the shade, and then rejoicing ‘At last I have
one who has effortlessly achieved the mouna (silence) or
reached the shade, how sweet is the shade!’ We are doing
Supreme State indicated by Cm>mayIR, you may take it that
exactly the same. We are not different from the Reality. We
the effort necessary has already been completed in a previous
imagine we are different, i.e., we create the bheda bhava (the
life. Such effortless and choiceless awareness is reached only
feeling of difference) and then undergo great sadhanas to get
after deliberate meditation.
rid of the bheda bhava and realize the oneness. Why imagine
The books no doubt speak of sravana (hearing), manana
or create the bheda bhava and then destroy it?
(reflection), nididhyasana (one-pointed concentration),
It is false to speak of realization. What is there to realize?\n--- 第18页 ---\n34
free from thought, it is Nirvikalpa Samadhi. When through samadhi and sakshatkara (Realization). We are always the
practice we are always in that state, not going into samadhi and sakshat (Real) and what is there for one to attain after that?
coming out again, that is the sahaja (natural) state. In sahaja We call this world sakshat or pratyaksha (directly present).
one always sees oneself. He sees the jagat (world) as swarupa What is changing, what appears and disappears, what is not
(Reality) or Brahmakara (form of Brahman). Eventually, what sakshat, we regard as sakshat. We are always, and nothing can
was once the means becomes itself the goal, whatever method be more directly present than we, and about that we say we
one follows. Dhyana (meditation), jnana, bhakti and samadhi have to attain sakshatkaram after all these sadhanas. Nothing
are all names for ourselves, for our Real State. can be more strange than this. The Self is not attained by doing
Knowing one’s Self is only being one’s Self, as there is anything other than remaining still and being as we are.
no second existence. This is Self-realization. We say that what we see with the eyes alone is pratyaksha.
You may go on reading any number of books on Vedanta. There must first be the seer before anything could be seen.
They can only tell you ‘Realize the Self’. The Self cannot be You are yourself the eye that sees, An>tmIlak>k] (andhamila
found in books. You have to find it for yourself in yourself. kann) the ‘Infinite Eye’ referred to in Ulladu Narpadu (Reality
The Lord whose home is the interior of the Heart-Lotus in Forty Verses).
. . .
is extolled as the Lord of the Cave. If by force of practise the People are afraid that when the ego or the mind is killed,
feeling ‘I am He, I am the Lord of the Cave’(Guhesa) becomes the result may be a mere blank and not happiness. What really
firmly established, as firmly as your present notion that you are happens is that the thinker, the object of thought and thinking
the ego is established in the body, and thus you stand forth as all merge into the one Source, which is Consciousness and
the Lord of the Cave, the illusion that you are the perishable Bliss itself, and thus that state is neither inert nor blank. I do
body will vanish like darkness before the rising sun. not understand why people should be afraid of that state in
The true karma, yoga, bhakti or jnana consists in finding which all thoughts cease to exist and the mind is killed. Every
out who it is that does the karma, or seeks reunion through day they experience that state in sleep. There is no mind or
yoga, or feels separation from his Lord, or is in ignorance. thought in sleep. Yet when one rises from sleep one says, ‘I
All these do not exist without the ‘I’. So to remain as the ‘I’ slept happily.’ Sleep is so dear to everyone that no one, prince
is the Truth. or beggar, can do without it.
If we regard ourselves as the doers of action we shall also When we have vikalpas (false concepts) and are trying to
be the enjoyers of the fruits of such action. If by enquiring who give them up, i.e. when we are still not perfected, but have
does these actions one realizes one’s Self, the sense that one to make conscious effort to keep the mind one-pointed or\n--- 第19页 ---\n36
There is no knowledge apart from ignorance, and no is the doer vanishes and with it all the three kinds of karma
ignorance apart from knowledge. That alone is jnana or real (viz. sanchita, agamya and prarabdha*). This is the state of
knowledge, which when enquiring to whom this knowledge eternal Mukti or Liberation.
or ignorance arises, reaches that Source which is the Self. Our Real Nature is Mukti. But we imagine that we are
The thought ‘I am the body’ is ignorance. That the body bound and are making strenuous attempts to become free,
is not apart from the Self is knowledge. The body is a mental while we are all the time free. This will be understood only
projection. The mind is the ego, and the ego rises from the Self. when we reach that stage. We will be surprised that we were
The body thought is distracting and strays away from the Self. frantically trying to attain something which we have always
For whom is the body or birth? Not for the Self, the Spirit. It is been and are. An illustration will make this clear: A man
for the non-self which imagines itself separate from the Self. goes to sleep in this hall. He dreams he has gone on a world
So long as there is the sense of separation there will be tour, is roaming over hill and dale, forest and country, desert
afflicting thoughts. If the original source is regained and the and sea, across various continents and, after many years of
sense of separation ends, there is peace. A stone picked up from weary and strenuous travel, returns to this country, reaches
its place and thrown up into the sky has no rest till it comes Tiruvannamalai, enters the Asramam and walks into the hall.
back to earth. The waters of the sea evaporating and rising Just at that moment he wakes up and finds he has not moved an
into the sky as clouds find no rest till they come back as rain, inch, but was sleeping where he lay down. He has not returned
and finally rush back to the sea. The ego can have peace only to the hall after great efforts, but is and always has been in the
when it merges back into its Source, the Self. hall. It is exactly like that. If it is asked, why being free we
Seeing God in any form and speaking to Him is as real as imagine we are bound, I answer, ‘Why being in the hall did
your own reality. In other words, when you identify yourself you imagine you were on a world adventure, crossing hill and
with the body in the waking state, you see gross objects; when dale, desert and sea?’ It is all mind or maya.
in the subtle body (the mental plane) as in dream, you see The dyads or the pairs of opposites, such as pleasure and
objects equally subtle; in the absence of all identification, as pain, and the triads, or such differences as the knower, the
in dreamless sleep, you see nothing. The objects seen, bear a known, and the process of knowing, depend on one thing - the
* The three kinds of karmas are: prarabdha, being that portion of one’s ego. When one seeks for that thing in the Heart and finds out
past karma to be worked out in the present body; sanchita being the its Real Nature they will vanish. Those alone who have found
outstanding balance of past karma, and agamya being the karma that out the Real Nature of the ego have seen the Reality. They will
will bear fruit in future births. have no more doubts or anxieties.\n--- 第20页 ---\n38
that is realized, effort is necessary. After tasting such bliss relation to the state of the seer. The same applies to visions of
even once, one will repeatedly try to regain it. Having once gods. By long practice, the figure of God as meditated upon
experienced the bliss of peace, no one would like to be out appears in dream and may later appear even in the waking state.
of it or engage himself otherwise. It is as difficult for a Jnani There was a saint by the name Nam Dev. He could see,
to engage in thoughts, as it is for an ajnani to be free from talk and play with Vithoba, the God of Pandharpur. God had
thought. to teach him that that was not enough, and one must press on
Any kind of activity does not affect a Jnani. He remains further and realize the Self where seer and seen are one.
ever in eternal peace. Vision of Siva: Vision is always of an object. That implies
Ishta Devata (deity of one’s choice) and Guru are aids, the existence of a subject. The value of the vision is the same
very powerful aids on this path. But for an aid to be effective as that of the seer. The nature of the vision is on the same plane
requires your effort also. Your effort is a sine qua non. It is as that of the seer. Appearance implies disappearance as well.
you who should see the sun. Can spectacles and the sun see Whatever appears must also disappear. A vision can never be
for you? You yourself have to see your True Nature. Not much eternal. But Siva is eternal.
aid is required for doing it. Viswarupa darsana (vision of the cosmic form) and
First one sees the Self as objects, then one sees the Self as Viswatma darsana (vision of the universal self) are the same.
void, and then one sees the Self as the Self; only in this last Such darsana is not by eyesight or in any gross fashion. As
case is there no seeing because seeing is becoming. there is only Being, without a second, anything seen cannot
The more we control thought, activity and food, the more be real. That is the truth.
we will be able to control sleep. But moderation ought to be The moral behind the story of Ashtavakra and Janaka is
the rule for the sadhak (aspirant), as explained in the Gita. As simply this: The disciple surrenders himself to the Master.
explained in the Gita, sleep is the first obstacle for all sadhakas. That means there is no vestige of individuality retained by the
The second obstacle is said to be vikshepa, or the sense objects disciple. If the surrender is complete, all sense of individuality
of the world which divert one’s attention. The third is said to is lost and there is no cause for misery. The Eternal Self is only
be kashaya or thoughts about previous experiences with sense happiness and that is revealed.
objects. The fourth, ananda (bliss), is also called an obstacle, The whole of Vedanta is contained in the two Biblical
because in that state a feeling of separation from the source of statements ‘I am that I am’ and ‘Be still and know that I am
ananda, enabling the enjoyer to say, ‘I am enjoying ananda,’ is God’.
present. Even this has to be surmounted, and the final stage of There is a state beyond our efforts or effortlessness. Until\n--- 第21页 ---\n40
samadhana or samadhi has to be reached, where one becomes
ananda, or One with the Reality, and the duality of enjoyer and
enjoyment ceases in the ocean of Satchidananda (Existence-
Consciousness-Bliss) or the Self.
The power of a Jnani’s Self-Realization is more powerful
than all occult powers. To the Jnani there are no others. But
what is the highest benefit that can be conferred on ‘others’ as
we call them? It is happiness. Happiness is born of peace. Peace
can reign only when there is no disturbance by thought. When
the mind has been annihilated, there will be perfect peace. As
there is no mind, the Jnani cannot be aware of others. But the
mere fact of His Self-Realization is itself enough to make all
others peaceful and happy.
The following extract from a letter of the poet Tennyson
to B. P. Blood was read out in Bhagavan’s presence: ‘… a
kind of waking trance I have frequently had, quite up from
boyhood, when I have been all alone. This has generally come
upon me through repeating my own name two or three times to
myself, silently, till all at once, as it were out of the intensity of
consciousness of individuality, the individuality itself seemed
to dissolve and fade away into boundless being; and this not
a confused state but the clearest of the clearest, the surest of
the surest, the weirdest of the weirdest, utterly beyond words,
IX where death was an almost laughable impossibility, the loss
of personality (if so it were) seeming no extinction but the
only true life’.
HEART
Bhagavan said, ‘That state is called abidance in the Self.’
In the centre of the cavity of the Heart the sole Brahman\n--- 第22页 ---\n42
mirror in which all these are mere reflections? What is the shines by itself as the Atman (Self) in the feeling of ‘I-I’. Reach
heart of all souls or creatures in this universe?’ Vasishta replied: the Heart by diving within yourself, either with control of
‘All creatures in this universe have two kinds of hearts - one breath, or with thought concentrated on the quest of the Self.
to be taken note of and the other ignored. Hear their respective You will thus get fixed in the Self.
traits: The one to be ignored is the physical organ called the I have been saying all along that the Heart Centre is on
heart which is situated in the chest as a part of the measurable the right side, even when learned men differed from me. I
body. The one to be taken note of is the Heart which is of the speak from experience. I knew it even in my home during
nature of consciousness. It is both inside and outside (us) and my trances (samadhi). Again during the incident recorded
has neither an inside nor an outside.’ in Self-Realization, I had a very clear vision and experience.
This is the really important Heart. It is the mirror which All of a sudden a light came from one side erasing the world-
holds all reflections. It is the basis and source of all objects and vision. I felt that the heart on the left had stopped and the body
all kinds of wealth. Therefore, it is only that Consciousness, became blue and inert. Vasudeva Sastri embraced the body
which is the Heart of all, not that organ - a small part of the and wept over my death, but I could not speak. All the time I
body, which is insentient like a stone, and perishable. So one was feeling that the Heart Centre on the right was working as
can achieve the eradication of all desires and control of breath, well as ever. This state lasted fifteen or twenty minutes. Then
by practice of merging the mind in the Heart, which is Pure suddenly something shot out from the right to the left like a
Consciousness. rocket bursting into the sky. The blood resumed circulation
Concentrating one’s thoughts solely on the Self will lead to and the normal condition of the body was restored.
happiness or bliss. Drawing in the thoughts, restraining them The entire universe is condensed in the body and the entire
and preventing them from going outwards is called vairagya. body in the Heart. Thus the Heart is the nucleus of the whole
Fixing them in the Self is sadhana or abhyasa (practice). universe. This world is not other than the mind, the mind is
Concentrating on the Heart is the same as concentrating on not other than the Heart; that is the whole truth.
the Self. The Heart is another name for the Self. The source is a point without any dimensions. It expands
The Self is the Heart. The Heart is Self-luminous. Light as the cosmos on the one hand and as Infinite bliss on the
arises from the Heart and reaches the brain which is the seat other. That point is the pivot. From it a single vasana starts
of the mind. The world is seen with the mind, that is by the and expands as the experiencer (‘I’), the experience and the
reflected light of the Self. It is perceived with the aid of the experienced (the world).
mind. When the mind is illumined it is aware of the world. To Rama who questioned Vasishta: ‘Which is that big\n--- 第23页 ---\n44
in the scheme of Moksha (liberation)?’ Bhagavan said, ‘Why When it is not itself so illumined, it is not aware of the world. If
do you think you are a grihastha? If you go out as a sannyasi the mind is turned inward towards the source of light, objective
(ascetic), a similar thought that you are a sannyasi will haunt knowledge ceases and the Self alone shines forth as the Heart.
you. Whether you continue in the household or renounce it and The moon shines by the reflected light of the sun. When
go to the forest, your mind goes with you. The ego is the source the sun has set, the moon is useful for revealing objects. When
of all thought. It creates the body and the world and makes the sun has risen, no one needs the moon, although the pale
you think you are a grihastha. If you renounce the world it disc of the moon is still visible in the sky. So it is with the
will only substitute the thought sannyasi for grihastha, and the mind and the Heart.
environments of the forest for those of the household. But the
mental obstacles will still be there. They even increase in the
new surroundings. There is no help in a change of environment.
The obstacle is the mind. It must be got over whether at home
or in the forest. If you can do it in the forest, why not at home?
Therefore, why change your environment? Your efforts can
be made even now - in whatever environment you are now.
The environment will never change according to your desire’.
If objects have an independent existence, i.e., if they exist
anywhere apart from you, then it may be possible for you to
go away from them. But they do not exist apart from you; they
owe their existence to you, your thoughts. So where can you
go to escape them?
Where can you go, fleeing from the world or objects?
They are like the shadow of man, which the man cannot flee X
from. There is a funny story of a man who wanted to bury
his shadow. He dug a deep pit, and seeing his shadow at
RENUNCIATION
the bottom, was glad he could bury it so deep. He went on
filling the pit, and when he had completely filled it up, he was
surprised and disappointed to find the shadow on the top. Even When asked: ‘How does a grihastha (householder) fare\n--- 第24页 ---\n46
that, or whether he gives up his duties or not. All that happens so, the objects or thoughts of them will be always with you
according to destiny. until you realize the Self.
All the activities that the body is to go through are Why should your occupation or duties in life interfere
determined when it first comes into existence. It does not rest with your spiritual effort? For instance, there is a difference
with you to accept or reject them. The only freedom you have between your activities at home and in the office. In your office
is to turn your mind inward and renounce activities there. activities you are detached, and so long as you do your duty
Nobody can say why that freedom alone and no other freedom you do not care what happens, or whether it results in gain or
is left to man. That is the Divine scheme. loss to the employer. But your duties at home are performed
Giving up activities means giving up attachment to with attachment and you are all the time anxious as to whether
activities or the fruits thereof, giving up the notion ‘I am the they will bring advantage or disadvantage to you and your
doer’. The activities which this body is destined to perform family. It is possible to perform all the activities of life with
will have to be gone through. There is no question of giving detachment and regard only the Self as real. It is wrong to
up such activities, whether one likes it or not. suppose that if one is fixed in the Self, one’s duties in life will
If one remains fixed in the Self, the activities will still go not be performed properly. It is like an actor. He dresses, acts
on and their success will not be affected. One should not have and even feels the part he is playing, but he knows that he is
the idea that one is the doer. The activities will still go on. That really not that character but someone else in real life. In the
force, by whatever name you call it, which brought the body same way, why should the body-consciousness or the feeling
into existence will see to it that the activities which this body ‘I am the body’ disturb you once you know for certain that
is meant to go through are brought about. you are not the body but the Self. Nothing that the body does
If the passions are something external to us, we can take should shake you from abidance in the Self. Such abidance
arms and ammunition and conquer them. They all come from will never interfere with the proper and effective discharge
within us. If by looking into the source whence they come, we of whatever duties the body has, any more than the actor’s
prevent their coming up and we shall conquer them. It is the being aware of his real status in life interferes with his acting
world and the objects in it that arouse our passions. But the a part on the stage.
world and these objects are only created by our mind. They Renunciation is always in the mind, not in going to the
do not exist during our deep sleep. forest or solitary places, or giving up one’s duties. The main
The fact is that any amount of action can be performed, thing is to see that the mind does not turn outward but inward. It
and performed quite well by the Jnani, without His identifying does not really rest with a man whether he goes to this place or\n--- 第25页 ---\n48
of past action; it concerns the body. Let the body act as may suit Himself with it in any way, or ever imagining that He is the
it. Why are you concerned about it? Why do you pay attention doer. Some power acts through His body and uses His body
to it? Freewill and destiny last as long as the body lasts. But to get the work done.
jnana transcends both. The Self is beyond knowledge and
ignorance. Whatever happens, happens as the result of one’s
past actions, of divine will and of other factors.
There are only two ways to conquer destiny or be
independent of it. One is to enquire for whom is this destiny,
and discover that only the ego is bound by destiny and not the
Self, and that the ego is non-existent.
The other way is to kill the ego by completely surrendering
to the Lord, by realizing one’s helplessness and saying all the
time, ‘Not I, but Thou Oh Lord’ and giving up all sense of ‘I’
and ‘mine’, and leaving it to the Lord to do what he likes with
you. Complete effacement of the ego is necessary to conquer
destiny, whether you achieve this effacement through Self-
enquiry or bhakti marga (path of devotion).
Everything is predetermined. But a man is always free
not to identify himself with the body, and not to be affected
by the pleasures or pains consequent on the body’s activities.
Those alone who have no knowledge of the Source whence
fate and freewill arise, will dispute which of them can conquer
the other. Those who have realized their Self, which is the
XI
Source of both fate and freewill have left such disputes behind,
and will have nothing more to do with them.
Success and failure are due to prarabdha karma, and not FATE AND FREEWILL
to willpower or the lack of it. One should try to gain equipoise
of mind under all circumstances. That is willpower. Freewill and destiny are ever existent. Destiny is the result\n--- 第26页 ---\n50
and now. It is immaterial to Him as to how, where and when
He leaves the body. Some Jnanis may appear to suffer, others
may be in samadhi; still others may disappear from sight
before death. But that makes no difference to their jnana.
Such suffering is only apparent, seeming real to the onlooker,
but not felt by the Jnani, for He has already transcended the
mistaken identity of the Self with the body.
The Jnani does not think He is the body. He does not even
see the body. He sees only the Self in the body. If the body is
not there, but only the Self, the question of its disappearing
in any form does not arise.
In books, it is mentioned that the greatest malady we have
is the body, the pvenay> (bhava-noy - disease of birth), and if
one takes medicine to strengthen and prolong its life, it is like
a man taking medicine to perpetuate his disease. A Sanskrit
verse in Canto XI of the Bhagavata says the body is not real
(impermanent). Whether it is at rest, or moves about, and
whether by reason of prarabdha it clings to Him or falls off
from Him, the Self-Realized Siddha is not aware of it, even as
the drunken man blinded by intoxication is unaware whether
his cloth is on his body or not.
Illustrations are given in the books as to how a Jnani who is
in the sahaja state and who always sees only the Self, can move XII
about and live in the world like everyone else. For instance,
you see a reflection in the mirror, you know the mirror to be
JNANI
the reality and the picture in it a mere reflection. In order to
see the mirror, is it necessary that one should cease to see the
reflection in it? A Jnani has attained Liberation even while alive, here\n--- 第27页 ---\n52
in the affairs of the world without any detriment to yourself. Or again take the screen illustration: There is a screen.
Freeing yourself from all sorts of bonds, maintaining the same On that screen first appears the figure of a king. He sits on
equanimity and doing work externally in conformity with the a throne. Then before him in that same screen a play begins
environment in which you find yourself, disport yourself as with various figures and objects and the king on the screen
you like in the world. watches the play on the same screen. The seer and the seen
He whose mind is not attached to any desires, does no are mere shadows on the screen, which is the only reality
action in reality, though his body may act. He is like one who supporting these pictures. In the world also, the seer and the
is hearing a story with his mind elsewhere. Similarly, the man seen together constitute the mind and the mind is supported
whose mind is full of desires is really acting though his body by, or based on, the Self.
may be actionless. A man may be sleeping here with his body You are under the impression you are the body. So you
inert, and yet he may be climbing hills and falling from them think the Jnani also has a body. Does the Jnani say He has a
in dream at the same time. body? He may look to you as having a body and doing things
It is all the same to one who is fast asleep in a cart, whether with the body as others do. The burnt rope still looks like a
the cart moves or stops, with the bulls left yoked or unyoked. rope but it cannot serve as a rope if you try to bind anything
Similarly for the Jnani who has gone to sleep in the cart of with it. As long as one identifies oneself with the body, all of
His physical body, it does not matter whether He works or is this is difficult to understand.
in deep meditation (samadhi), or is asleep. Examine all the different kinds of states. Take hold of that
The statement that the Jnani retains prarabdha while free State which alone is the Supreme and True One and engage
from sanchita and agamya karmas* is only a formal answer yourself in action in the world, regarding your life there as
to the questions of the ignorant. Of several wives none escapes mere sport. You have discovered That which is the Reality
widowhood when the husband dies; even so, when the doer inside your Heart behind all the appearances of this world. So,
goes all three karmas vanish. without ever letting That out of your sight, disport yourself
The non-action of the Sage is really unceasing activity. His as you like in the world. Seeming to have enthusiasm and
characteristic is eternal and intense activity. His stillness is like gratification, anxieties and aversions (but really having none
the apparent stillness of a very fast-rotating top. Its extreme of them), seeming to begin and persevere in endeavours (but
speed cannot be followed by the eye and so it appears to be really having no attachment to such efforts), engage yourself
still. This must be explained, as people generally mistake the
* See note on page 31 for the meanings of these three karmas\n--- 第28页 ---\n54
you identify one body with Bhagavan and another body with stillness of the Sage for inertness.
yourself, you find two separate entities and speak of going
away from here. Wherever you may be, you cannot leave me.
Sri Ramakrishna is said to have seen life in the image of
Kali that he worshipped. That life was perceived by him, not
by all. The vital force was due to himself. It was his own vital
force which manifested as if it were outside and drew him in.
Were the image really alive it must have appeared so to all. On
the other hand, everything is full of life. That is the fact. Many
devotees have had experiences similar to Sri Ramakrishna.
Christ is the ego and the Cross, the body. When the ego is
crucified and it perishes, what survives is the Absolute Being
(God); cf.., ‘I and my Father are one.’ This glorious survival
is called the Resurrection. God the Father represents Isvara,
the Son is the Guru, and the Holy Ghost is the Atman.
The Bible says, ‘Be still and know that I am God,’ Psalm
46. Found in the Ecclesiastics: ‘There is one alone and there
is no second’ and ‘The wise man’s heart is at the right hand
and a fool’s heart is at the left’.
No thought will go in vain. Every thought will produce its
effect sometime or other. Thought force will never go in vain.
Some have maintained that the body can be made immortal
and they give recipes, medical or other, for perfecting this body
XIII
and making it defy death. The Siddha School (as it is known
in the South) has believed in such a doctrine. Venkasami Rao
in Kumbakonam started a school which believed the same. MISCELLANEOUS
There is a society in Pondichery too. There is also the school
which believes in transforming men into supermen by descent No one can be out of sight of the Supreme Presence. Since\n--- 第29页 ---\n56
entangled in the affairs of others. Giving to others is really of Divine Power. But all the people, after writing long treatises
giving to oneself. If one knows this truth, would one ever on the indestructibility of their bodies, after giving medical
remain without giving? and yogic recipes to perfect the body and keep it alive forever,
If ego rises, all will rise. If the ego merges, all will merge. pass away one day.
The more we are humble, the better it is for us. Name of God and God are not different. The Bible also
The best and most potent diksha (initiation) is by silence, has it: ‘In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with
which was practised by Lord Dakshinamurti. Those by touch, God and the Word was God.’
look, etc. are of a lower order. Mouna can change all hearts. In the name Rama, ‘Ra’ stands for the Self, and ‘ma’ for
Bhagavan, when asked by a devotee whether he should the ego. As one goes on repeating ‘Rama’, ‘Rama’, the ‘ma’
continue taking the name of God as advised by his late Guru, disappears, getting merged in the ‘Ra’ and then ‘Ra’ alone
or change over to vichara (enquiry), referred the devotee to remains. In that state there is no conscious effort at dhyana,
an article in Vision of September 1937, on the ‘Philosophy of but dhyana is always there, for dhyana is our real nature.
the Divine Name according to Saint Nam Dev’, in which it is The yogi may be definitely aiming at rousing the Kundalini
explained that God and God’s Name are all the same. (the Serpent-power) and sending it up the sushumna (yogic
The sun illumines the universe, whereas the Sun of nerve). The Jnani may not have this as His object, but both
Arunachala is so dazzling, that in It the universe is not seen; achieve the same result, that of sending the life-force up the
there remains only an unbroken brilliance. sushumna and severing the chitjadagranthi (the knot binding
It is not true that birth as a man is necessarily the highest, the sentient and the inert). Kundalini is another name for Atma
that one must attain Self-Realization while only being a man. or Self, or Sakti. We talk of it as being inside the body because
Even an animal can attain Self-Realization. we conceive ourselves as limited to the body. But it is in reality
There is no need for anyone to start reforming the country both inside and outside, being no other than the Self, or Sakti.
or the nation before reforming himself. Each man’s first duty In the jnana marga, when by Self-enquiry the mind is merged
is to realize his True Nature. If after doing this he feels like in the Self, the Self, its Sakti or Kundalini rises automatically.
reforming the country or nation, by all means let him take If peace of mind is true Mukti or Liberation, how can
up such reform. Swami Ram Tirtha advertised: ‘Wanted those whose minds are set on siddhis (miraculous powers),
Reformers - but reformers who will reform themselves first’. which cannot be attained except with the help and activity of
No two persons in the world can be alike or can act alike. the mind, attain Mukti, where all turmoil of the mind ceases?
External differences are bound to persist, however hard we Avoid desire and aversion. Do not engage the mind
much in the affairs of the world. As far as possible do not get\n--- 第30页 ---\n58
(sacred ash) is Siva (Absolute Being) and kumkum (vermillion may try to eliminate them. The only solution is for each man
powder) is Sakti (consciousness) . to realize his True Nature.
The puranas speak of this Hill (Arunachala) as being The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad says ‘Aham’ is the first
hollow, with cities and streets inside it. I have also seen such name of God. The first letter in Sanskrit is ‘A’ and the last letter
things in visions. The books speak of the Heart as a cavity. ‘Ha’ and ‘Aha’ thus includes everything from the beginning to
But penetration into it proves it to be an expanse of light. the end. The word Ayam means That which exists, self-shining
Similarly the Hill is one of light. The caves, etc. are covered and self-evident. Ayam, Atma, Aham all refer to the same thing.
up with that light. In the Bible also, ‘I AM’ is given as the first name of God.
The means prescribed for securing the spiritual end, such If we concentrate on any thought and go to sleep in
as charity, penance, sacrifice, dharma (virtuous conduct), that state, immediately on waking up the same thought will
yoga, bhakti (devotion) and the end itself described variously continue in our minds. People who are given chloroform are
as Heaven, the Supreme Object, Peace, Truth, Grace, asked to count one, two, etc. A man who goes under after
the Quiescent State, Deathless Death, True Knowledge, saying six, for instance, will, when he comes round again,
renunciation, Moksha (Liberation) and Bliss are all nothing start saying seven, eight, etc.
but being free from the obsession that the body is the Self. When I laid down with limbs outstretched and mentally
Give up regarding yourself as this despicable body and enacted the death scene, and realized that the body would
realize your Real Nature, which is one of Eternal Bliss. Seeking be taken and cremated and yet I would live, some force, call
to know thyself while still anxious about the welfare of the it atmic power or anything else, rose within me and took
body, is like attempting to cross a stream with the aid of a possession of me. With that I was reborn and I became a new
crocodile for a raft. man. I became indifferent to everything afterwards, having
Not desiring the non-Self is dispassion (vairagya). neither likes nor dislikes.
Inhering in the Self is Jnana. Both are the same. From silence came thought, from thought the ego, and
from ego speech. So, if speech is effective, how much more
so must be its source?
Karpura arathi (burning camphor before God) is symbolic
of burning away the mind by the light of illumination. Vibhuti