\n--- 第1页 ---\nMAHA YOGA
OR
THE UPANISHADIC LORE
IN THE LIGHT OF THE TEACHINGS OF
BHAGAVAN SRI RAMANA
BY
“WHO”
SRI RAMANASRAMAM
Tiruvannamalai
2002\n--- 第2页 ---\n© Sri Ramanasramam, Tiruvannamalai
First Edition : 1937
Second Edition: 1942
Third Edition: 1947
Fourth Edition : 1950
Fifth Edition : 1961
Sixth Edition : 1967
Seventh Edition : 1973
Eighth Edition : 1984
Ninth Edition: 1996
Tenth Edition: 2002 - 2000 copies
Price: Rs.80/-
CC No: 1027
ISBN: 81-88018-20-1
Published by
V.S. RAMANAN
President, Board of Trustees
Sri Ramanasramam
Tiruvannamalai 606 603
Tamil Nadu
India
Tel: 91-4175-37292
Fax: 91-4175-37491
Email: ashram@ramana-maharshi.org
Website: www.ramana-maharshi.org
Designed and typeset at
Sri Ramanasramam
Printed by
Sudarsan Graphics
Chennai - 600 017\n--- 第3页 ---\nForeword
In this book the author passes the philosophical portion
of Sri Ramana Maharshi’s teaching through the Advaitic acid-
test, and then declares the teaching to be genuine coin of the
Advaitic realm. For the author is a keen and uncompromising
upholder of the doctrine that the world, God and the individual
soul are really a unity and that their seeming separateness is
but an illusion.
I am not sufficiently competent a metaphysician to pass
judgement upon his conclusions, but I perceive that he states
his case and rallies the Master’s statements to his support with
a convincing and unhesitating pleading that must be difficult
to refute. At any rate he has added many true points about
other aspects of Sri Ramana Maharshi’s teaching — such as
the nature of the personal ego and the necessity of devotion
in some form or other — and he writes with such clearness
of thought and expression that I have frequently admired
both his mind and his literary style. It is with some pleasure
that I recommend this book to the notice of those interested
in the metaphysical side of the Maharshi’s writings and
sayings.
PAUL BRUNTON
iii\n--- 第4页 ---\nPreface to the Eighth Edition
Maha Yoga or The Upanishadic Lore in the Light of the
Teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana is both a profound
exposition of Sri Ramana’s teachings and a lucid summary of
the whole Vedantic philosophy, the ancient lore of the
Upanishads. Before an aspirant embarks upon the practice of
Self-enquiry, which is the cornerstone of Sri Ramana’s
teachings and the essence of the Upanishadic lore, it is
extremely useful — if not essential — for him to have a clear
and well-founded understanding of the theoretical background
upon which the practice of Self-enquiry is based, and such an
understanding is possibly not made available to aspirants
anywhere so clearly as in this book, which elucidates many
important aspects of Sri Ramana’s teachings.
The author of this book, Sri K. Lakshmana Sarma
(‘WHO’), was amply qualified to write such an exposition,
because he spent more than twenty years in close association
with Bhagavan Sri Ramana and he made a deep study of His
teachings under His personal guidance. One day in 1928 or
1929 Sri Bhagavan asked Lakshmana Sarma, “Have you not
read Ulladu Narpadu?” Lakshmana Sarma replied that he had
not, because he was unable to understand the classical style of
Tamil in which it was composed, but he eagerly added that he
would like to study it if Sri Bhagavan would graciously teach
him the meaning. Thus began the disciple’s close association
with his Master. Sri Bhagavan started to explain to him slowly
and in detail the meaning of each verse, and Lakshmana Sarma,
being a lover of Sanskrit, started to compose Sanskrit verses
embodying the meaning of each Tamil verse as it was explained
to him. After composing each verse in Sanskrit, Lakshmana
iv\n--- 第5页 ---\nSarma submitted it to Sri Bhagavan for correction and approval,
and if Sri Bhagavan’s approval was not forthcoming he would
recompose the verse as often as was necessary until His approval
was obtained. In this way all the verses of Ulladu Narpadu
were rendered into Sanskrit within a few months. But
Lakshmana Sarma was unable to stop with that. He was so
fascinated by the profound import of Ulladu Narpadu that he
felt impelled to go on revising his Sanskrit rendering any number
of times until he was able to make it an almost perfect and
faithful replica of the Tamil original. For two or three years he
went on repeatedly revising his translation with the close help
and guidance of Sri Bhagavan, who always appreciated his
sincere efforts and who once remarked, “It is like a great tapas
for him to go on revising his translation so many times.” Because
of his repeated efforts to make such a faithful Sanskrit rendering
of Ulladu Narpadu, Lakshmana Sarma was blessed with the
opportunity of receiving long and pertinent instructions from
Sri Bhagavan about the very core of His teachings.
At first Lakshmana Sarma had no idea of publishing his
Sanskrit rendering of Ulladu Narpadu, which he was preparing
for his own personal benefit, and he had even less idea of writing
any lengthy exposition upon Sri Bhagavan’s teachings.
However, towards the end of 1931 a certain book was published
which purported to be a commentary on Sri Bhagavan’s
teachings, but when Lakshmana Sarma read it he was distressed
to see that it gave a very distorted picture of the teachings, so
he approached Sri Bhagavan and said in a prayerful attitude,
“If your teachings are misinterpreted like this in your very
lifetime, what will become of them in future? Will not people
think that you have approved this book? Should not such a
wrong interpretation be openly condemned?” But Sri Bhagavan
replied, “According to the purity of the mind (antahkarana) of
v\n--- 第6页 ---\neach person, the same teaching is reflected in different ways. If
you think you can expound the teachings more faithfully, you
may write your own commentary.” Prompted thus by Sri
Bhagavan, Lakshmana Sarma began to write a Tamil
commentary on Ulladu Narpadu, which was first published in
1936, and Maha Yoga, which was first published in 1937. In
later years Sri Bhagavan once remarked that of all the
commentaries on Ulladu Narpadu which then existed,
Lakshmana Sarma’s Tamil commentary was the best.
Maha Yoga is based largely upon two Sanskrit works,
namely Sri Ramana Hridayam and Guru Ramana Vachana
Mala, extracts from which are given in appendices A and B.
Sri Ramana Hridayam is Lakshmana Sarma’s Sanskrit
rendering of Ulladu Narpadu (The Forty Verses on Reality)
and Ulladu Narpadu Anubandham (The Supplement to the
Forty Verses on Reality), which are two of the most important
Tamil works composed by Sri Bhagavan, while Guru Ramana
Vachana Mala is a work consisting of 350 verses composed by
Lakshmana Sarma, about 300 of which are translations of
selected verses from Sri Muruganar’s Guru Vachaka Kovai (The
Garland of Guru’s Sayings) and all of which embody the oral
teachings of Sri Bhagavan.* Just as Lakshmana Sarma had
composed Sri Ramana Hridayam with the help and guidance
of Sri Bhagavan, he composed Guru Ramana Vachana Mala
with the help of both Sri Bhagavan and Sri Muruganar, and in
doing so he had a further opportunity to study Sri Bhagavan’s
* The complete Sanskrit text of Sri Ramana Hridayam together with an
English translation is published by us in a book called Revelation, and
an English translation of the whole of Guru Ramana Vachana Mala is
published by us in a separate book. For details about these and other
books in English on the life and teachings of Sri Bhagavan, the reader
may refer to the bibliography given at the end of this book.
vi\n--- 第7页 ---\nteachings deeply and to receive pertinent instructions from Him.
On one occasion when Lakshmana Sarma was asked why he
had written Maha Yoga and his Tamil commentary on Ulladu
Narpadu under the pseudonym ‘WHO’, he replied, “I wrote in
those books only what I had learnt from Sri Bhagavan and Sri
Muruganar, so I felt ‘Who wrote it?’”
In addition to the many verses of Sri Ramana Hridayam
and Guru Ramana Vachana Mala which are quoted throughout
this book, the author also quotes numerous other sayings of Sri
Bhagavan and conversations with Him, particularly in the last
chapter. These other sayings and conversations were heard and
recorded by the author himself, and proof of their authenticity
lies in the fact that most of them have also been recorded either
in Maharshi’s Gospel or in Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi,
both of which were published after this book.
In his foreword to the first edition of Maha Yoga, which is
reproduced once again in this edition, Paul Brunton writes that
“in this book the author passes the philosophical portion of Sri
Ramana Maharshi’s teaching through the Advaitic acid-test,
and then declares the teaching to be genuine coin of the Advaitic
realm.” However, in his preface to that edition the author
explains that his intention was rather the other way round,
because in his view Sri Bhagavan’s teachings are the primary
authority and they confirm, rather than are confirmed by, the
ancient lore of the Upanishads. To cite the author’s own words:
“The ancient lore — the Upanishads — has received a
striking confirmation from the life and teachings of the Sage of
Arunachala, known as Bhagavan Sri Ramana. To his disciples,
both eastern and western, the written and oral teachings of the
Sage are the primary revelation, and the ancient lore is of value
because it is found to be in full accord with those teachings.
But even for those who look upon the ancient lore as of primary
authority, the teachings of a living Sage must be profoundly
vii\n--- 第8页 ---\ninteresting. In these pages a synthetic presentation of the old
and new revelations is sought to be given.”
When the first edition of Maha Yoga was published, it
quickly met with a warm response from the intelligent public,
and it was soon translated into French by Jean Herbert, who
looked upon it as a “most remarkable book”. This French
translation was published first in 1939 and again in 1940 as the
first volume of a series entitled Études sur Ramana Maharshi,
and Swami Siddeswarananda, the founder-President of Sri
Ramakrishna Mission in France, wrote a lengthy preface for
it,* which he concluded by saying:
“. . . But this mysticism of the Maharshi has its basis in
a profound and intelligent comprehension of life and its
problems. And to understand that, it is necessary to place the
Maharshi in His philosophical and cultural milieu. From this
point of view, no work is as powerful and as faithful to the
heritage of India as the beautiful study presented here. Its
author, Dr K. Lakshmana Sarma, is one of our friends. He
has spent years with the Maharshi exercising himself always
to his best to understand Him in the light of the words spoken
by the Sage on the philosophical problems and on this life of
illumination which, like the great fire lit on the Hill of
Arunachala, is a veritable light-house for those who wish to
see in modern India the revivifying effect of the Upanishadic
teachings consecrated by time.”
Since the first edition of Maha Yoga met with such warm
appreciation, Lakshmana Sarma was encouraged to revise and
enlarge upon it for the second edition, which was published
in 1942. The present edition is substantially the same as the
second edition, except for a few alterations which were made
* A condensed English translation of Swami Siddheswarananda’s preface
to the French version of Maha Yoga is published as an appendix to
Maharshi’s Gospel.
viii\n--- 第9页 ---\nby the author in the third and fourth editions, and except for
appendix C, which was printed in the first edition and which
we have decided to include again in this edition.* Since the
time when the second edition was published, Maha Yoga has
been translated and published in a number of other European
languages such as German and Portuguese.
Finally a word might be said about the title of this book.
At the end of chapter nine the author writes, “The Sage once
told this writer that the Quest is the Great Yoga — Maha Yoga
— and the reason is that, as shown here, all the Yogas are
included in the Quest”, and this is why he called this book
Maha Yoga. Once, some years after the publication of this book,
Sri Bhagavan came across a verse in the Kurma Purana (2.11.7)
in which Lord Siva declares, “That (yoga) in which one sees
the Self (atman), which is Me, the one immaculate and eternal
bliss, is considered to be the Maha Yoga pertaining to the
Supreme Lord.” Since this verse thus confirmed His statement
that Self-enquiry, the practice of attending to the Self, is the
‘Maha Yoga’, Sri Bhagavan transcribed it in His own copy of
Maha Yoga at the end of chapter nine.
We are happy to bring out yet another edition of this
valuable book, and we are sure that it will continue as ever
before to provide guidance and inspiration to all seekers of truth.
SRI RAMANASRAMAM T.N. VENKATARAMAN
14th April 1984. PUBLISHER.
* In the first edition of Maha Yoga this appendix was prefaced with the
remark: “The following passages are extracts from a letter written by a
critically minded visitor, which once appeared in the Vedanta Kesari
(Mylapore, Madras).” However, from the French translation of Maha
Yoga we come to know that the unnamed visitor who wrote it was Swami
Tapasyananda, a distinguished member of Sri Ramakrishna Mission.
ix\n--- 第10页 ---\nAuthor’s Note
MAHA YOGA is the Direct Method of finding the Truth
of Ourselves, It has nothing in common with what is commonly
known as ‘Yoga’, being quite simple — free from mysteries —
because it is concerned with the utter Truth of our Being, which
is Itself extremely simple.
MAHA YOGA frees its follower from his beliefs, not to
bind him with new beliefs, but to enable him to pursue with
success the Quest of the True Self, which transcends all creeds.
MAHA YOGA has been described as a process of
unlearning. Its follower has to unlearn all his knowledge, because,
being in relativity, it is ignorance, and therefore a hindrance.
This true Yoga is the subject-matter of the Upanishads.
But the Truth that is to be found by this Yoga is eternal and
needs to be testified to by living witnesses from time to time.
This book starts with the very reasonable assumption that only
a living Teacher can tell us the Upanishadic Truth, not the
Upanishads themselves, because they are just words and little
more, while the Living Teacher is an Incarnation of the Truth
we seek. The Living Teacher of our age was the Sage of
Arunachala, Bhagavan Sri Ramana, of whose life a brief sketch
is given in the first Chapter. His teachings are treated in this
book as the primary authority, and the Upanishadic lore as next
in value — as amplifying and supplementing it. The reader
need not accept anything that is set forth here, unless he finds it
to be in consonance with the actual teachings of the Sage.
x\n--- 第11页 ---\nContents
Foreword by Paul Brunton. . . . . . . . iii
Preface to the Eighth Edition. . . . . . . . iv
Author’s Note. . . . . . . . . . . . x
1. The Sage of Arunachala . . . . . . . . 1
2. Are We Happy? . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3. Ignorance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4. Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5. The World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6. The Soul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
7. God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
8. The Egoless State . . . . . . . . . . 103
9. The Quest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
10. The Sage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
11. Devotion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
12. Some more Sayings of the Sage . . . . . . ...188
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208
Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216
Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . 225\n--- 第12页 ---\nChapter 1
The Sage of Arunachala
T
HERE IS A profound Truth in us, the truth of ourselves,
the practical knowledge of which will make us free; but
he that would be free must seek, and reverently question one that
is himself free. So says the ancient lore.* Thus it emphasises the
need of resort to a living teacher of the Truth of the real Self, if
one such can be found. The knowledge that comes by the study
of the sacred lore is of little value; one can learn more, and more
quickly, from this silence of a living teacher than he can gather
by a lifetime of the study of the books.
We are told by the great teacher Sri Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa that there are two kinds of Sages, namely those
who are born with the mission to teach and elevate other men,
and those who have no such mission; the former are from
birth untainted by worldly desires; they win the state of
Deliverance about the time they cease to be boys; and they do
so with little or no effort; the latter are born in subjection to
worldly desires and weaknesses and have to go through a long
period of sustained and well-directed effort in order to reach
the same goal. The former kind of sage is naturally very rare.
Whenever such a one appears, multitudes of disciples and
devotees are drawn to him, and they profit greatly in his
VX²[d[Ó à{UnmVoZ n[aàíZoZ god`m &
*
CnXoú`pÝV Vo kmZ§ km{ZZñVÎdX{e©Z: &&
— Bhagavad Gita, 4.34.
1\n--- 第13页 ---\npresence. Bhagavan Sri Ramana is such a one. He is the last
of a long line of great Sages, who have renewed and confirmed
the teaching of the ancient Revelation.
He was born in the south of India in the village of
Tiruchuzhi about thirty miles from Madura, and received the
name of Venkataraman. His father died when he was twelve
years old and after that he was brought up by his mother and
uncles. The boy was sent for education, first to Dindigul and
then to Madura, which is a great centre of pilgrimage. His
guardians had no suspicion of what he was destined to become.
They tried their best to fashion him after their own idea of
what he should become; they sought to equip him for the life
of the world by giving him a ‘good education.’
The boy was not at all wanting in intelligence. But he was
incorrigibly indifferent to his studies; he would put forth no
personal effort to learn and remember; in so far as he did learn
something, he did so in spite of himself. The reason was that he
had no ‘will to get on in the world,’ which every boy has, who is
above the average. We now know that he was one of those rare
beings who bring with them an endowment of spirituality. That
perfection which was to make him the revered Master of millions
of men existed in him already in a latent state; and it is a law of
nature that a spiritual endowment makes one indifferent to worldly
gains. It is because the average man is poorly endowed in a
spiritual sense, that he falls an easy prey to worldly desires; urged
by these desires he takes great pains to achieve what he calls
success in life. We know that Sri Ramakrishna also had an
incorrigible aversion to “this bread-winning education.”
Thus the boy Ramana gained hardly any knowledge while
at school. But destiny put in his hands a copy of an ancient
sacred book in Tamil, which gives detailed narratives of the
sixty-three Saints of the cult of Siva. He read it through with
fervour. We have reason to believe that he had already been a
2\n--- 第14页 ---\nSaint of the same high degree of excellence, and had passed
this stage of spiritual evolution; he had in him the potentiality
of something far higher, namely the status of a Sage; when
we come to the chapter on Devotion we shall be able to see
the difference between a Saint and a Sage. For the present we
need only say that the Sage differs from the Saint as the ripe
fruit does from the flower. Saintliness is no more than the
promise of sagehood, which alone is perfection; when Jesus
told his disciples: ‘Be ye perfect even as your Father in Heaven
is perfect,’ he had in mind the Sage, not the Saint.
Even as a little boy, Ramana was continually aware of
something supremely holy, whose Name was Arunachala; this
we learn from a poem composed by the Sage later for the use
of his disciples. We see that he brought over from his past
lives a fully ripe devotion to that mysterious Being, which
most of us call God, but which may be more justly described
as the Spiritual Centre of life. This was seen on one occasion
in his boyhood, when an uncle of his spoke to him harshly; he
then went for consolation and peace, not to his earthly mother,
but to the Divine Mother in the temple of the village.
Sometimes also he would fall into what seemed to be an
exceptionally profound sleep, a sleep from which nothing
could awake him; if we may judge from the perfection which
he attained later, and which he enjoys in the waking state also,
we may surmise that this seeming sleep was in fact a spiritual
experience on an elevated plane of being.
Thus continued his life, a double life on parallel lines — a
life in the world which he led mechanically and without interest,
as one that did not really belong to the world, and a life in the
spirit, of which the people around him had not even the faintest
suspicion. This lasted till the end of the sixteenth year of his
life. He was then in the highest class in the high school course,
and it was expected that at the end of the course he would sit
3\n--- 第15页 ---\nfor the matriculation examination of the University of Madras;
but this was not to be; for then something happened, which
brought the boy’s schooling to an abrupt end.
The age-period of sixteen and seventeen is a critical one
for all. In the average man the mind is then overrun by
imaginations and desires, which revolve round the sense of
sex. But for a few exceptional souls it is the time of the
awakening to the true life — compared to which this thing
that we call life is death — the life that begins with the
blossoming of the spiritual perfections which are already latent
in them. This we find to be the case in the lives of all the
Saints and Sages of the world.
It is also a fact, appearing in the lives of the Sages of the
past, that this awakening begins as a rule with a sudden fear
of death. It is true that the fear of death is not unfamiliar to
common men; for it comes often enough to them; but there is
a difference in the reaction to this fear; to the common man it
makes very little difference; he is led to think of death when
he sees a funeral procession; sometimes he begins to
philosophise, more or less on traditional lines; but this mood
lasts only until his next meal; afterwards he becomes ‘normal’
again; the current of his life runs on the same lines as before.
The born Sage reacts differently to the thought of death.
He begins to reflect coolly, but with all the force of his
intelligence, on the problem of death; and this reflection is
the starting point of a concentrated effort to transcend the
realm of death. Thus it was in the case of Gautama Buddha.*
Thus it was also in the case of Ramana.
Thus he reflected: “Who or what is it that dies? It is this
visible body that dies; the kinsmen come and take it away and
* ‘Buddha’ means ‘a sage’. The Sage was also called Sugata which means
one that has attained the State of Deliverance.
4\n--- 第16页 ---\nburn it to ashes. But when this body dies, shall I also die? That
depends on what I really am. If I be this body, then when it
dies, I also would die; but if I be not this, then I would survive.”
Then there arose in his mind an overpowering desire to
find out, then and there, whether he — the real Self of him —
would survive after death. And it occurred to him that the
surest way to find it out would be to enact the process of
death. This he did by imagining that the body was dead. A
dead body does not speak nor breathe; nor has it any sensation;
all this he imagined with such perfect realism, that his body
became inert and rigid just like a corpse; his vital energies
were withdrawn from it, and gathered into the mind, which
now turned inwards, animated by the will to find the real Self,
if any. At this moment a mysterious power rose up from the
innermost core of his being and took complete possession of
the whole mind and life; by that power he — that is to say, his
mind and life — was taken inwards. What then happened is a
mystery; but we can gather some idea of it from the teachings
of the Sage himself. We must take it that, possessed by this
power — which is identical with what devotees call ‘grace’
— the mind plunged deep into the Source of all life and mind
and was merged in It. All this happened while he was wide
awake, and therefore he became aware of his own Real Self,
free from all thought-movement; this Self was free from the
bondage of desires and fears and therefore full of peace and
happiness. The state which he now reached was just the
Egoless State described in a later chapter — the state in which
the Real Self reigns alone, and in serene calmness. Thus
Ramana became a Sage. We shall never know what that state
is like, until we ourselves shall reach it and abide in it; but
with the help of his Revelation we shall be able to understand
what it is not.
5\n--- 第17页 ---\nFrom this we see that a sustained and one-pointed resolve
to find the real Self —which is the highest and purest form of
devotion — is the means of winning that Self. This is in accord
with a text of the ancient Revelation which says: “He alone
shall find this Self, who is powerfully attracted to Him in
complete devotion; to him that Self reveals Himself as He
really is.”* This is the highest truth of all religions; it was
differently expressed by Jesus, who said: “Ask, and It shall
be given; knock and It shall be opened.”
It is this very path that the Sage teaches in his answers to
disciples and in his writings. In one of the latter he calls it
‘the Direct Path for all’† by which all the problems of life are
transcended. The state that is won by pursuing this path is
called the Natural State — Sahajabhava. It is so called because
therein the Self is manifest as He really is, and not as He
appears to the ignorant. It is also described as the Egoless
State and the Mindless State. The truth of that State as revealed
by the Sage and by ancient Revelation is the subject of a later
chapter. Here it is enough to say that the Natural State is the
highest there is — that for one that has attained that State
there is nothing else to be striven for. For him the pilgrimage
of life is at an end.
Ramana had by this Experience become a ‘Sage’, or rather
the Sage that was always in him became unveiled. For him,
therefore, there could be no further evolution in spirituality.
Mind and body are by this Experience completely dissociated
from the Self. That is to say, the mind no longer identifies the
body with the Self. Ignorance being just this identification and
nothing more, and the mind itself — as will be seen later —
`_od¡f d¥UwVo VoZ bä`ñVñ`¡f AmË_m {dd¥UwVo VZy§ ñdm_² &&
*
— Katha Upanishad, 1.2.23.
† The passage referred to occurs in Upadesa Saram, verse 17.
6\n--- 第18页 ---\nbeing an outcome of this ignorance, this great Event is also
called the destruction or dissolution of the mind. Hence it is
strictly true that for the Sage there is no mind nor body nor
world. But that does not mean that body and mind are destroyed
in the sense that other people will cease to see them; for them
the Sage’s body and mind will continue to appear, and they
would appear to be affected by events, and hence there can be
a further history of the Sage. The Sage himself may seemingly
be active in diverse ways, though these actions are not really
his. Hence the course of events that occurred after this great
Event — some of which are narrated here — do not really
belong to the Sage; they do not affect him in any way.
Because Ramana had never read about nor heard of the
Nameless, Formless, Indescribable known to the learned as
Brahman, he had no doubts as to the nature of the State which
he won by this Event. Later, when he came to know that the
sacred books described the State of Deliverance as that in
which the Self is experienced as identical with that Reality,
he had not the least difficulty in understanding that he himself
had attained that State.*
Whatever occurred in the life of the Sage after this great
Event concerns only the body and the mind that apparently
survived the Event, and not the Sage himself. The divine
qualities and powers which are inherent to the Natural State
became soon manifest, since their exercise was necessary for
the fulfilment of the Sage’s mission in the world.
* It is said of one of the Sages of yore, namely Suka, the son of Vyasa,
that the great Event occurred for him without any effort on his part, but
that a doubt arose in his mind afterwards as to whether the State that
had thus come to him was or was not the final Goal. He asked his father,
who told him that it was. But seeing that the boy was not convinced,
Vyasa advised him to go to Janaka to get his doubt cleared. From Janaka
the boy learnt that there was nothing more for him to strive for. It is
noteworthy that in the case of Ramana this doubt did not arise.
7\n--- 第19页 ---\nThus it happened that immediately after this great
Event, in the intervals when his mind was not wholly
absorbed in the Natural State, it began to feel a need of some
object to take hold of. The only object that was acceptable
was God, in Whose love the sixty-three Saints had found
their highest happiness.
So Ramana began to frequent the temple oftener than
before. And there, in the presence of God, he would stand,
while floods of tears streamed from his eyes — such tears as
can flow only from the eyes of the most ardent of devotees. It
is ever the earnest prayer of all devotees that they may have
such profound devotion as this; for they consider that a copious
flow of tears is a manifestation of the highest devotion, which
itself is the fruit of divine grace. We can understand this
manifestation in Ramana only if we suppose that in a previous
life he had been such a great devotee. Also these floods of
tears might have, in this case, fulfilled some divine purpose;
for the tears of divine love are purifying and those that shed
them are exalted thereby; the vehicles of consciousness are
thereby transformed. So we may presume that in this way the
body and the mind of Ramana underwent changes which made
them worthy to serve as the abode of a great Teacher, a
Messenger of God.
Along with these manifestations there was also at the
time an acute sensation of heat in the body. All these
manifestations continued until the Sage arrived at
Tiruvannamalai and found himself in the Presence in the
temple there. We are told of a similar sensation of heat in the
case of Sri Ramakrishna.
We saw that as a student Ramana was annoyingly
backward. Now he became worse than ever; for he was
frequently lapsing into that mysterious state which he had
8\n--- 第20页 ---\nwon by his effortless quest of the real Self; when he was out
of it, he had not the least inclination for studies. His elders
could not understand what it was that had occurred to the
boy. They had always been inclined to be angry with him for
his aversion to study; and now they were provoked more than
ever. His elder brother, who was himself a student then, was
greatly irritated by these new ways of his. One day, about six
weeks after his first experience of the Egoless State, the brother
saw him going into it, when he ought to have been learning
his lessons; this provoked a stinging remark from the elder
one: “What is the use of these things (books and other things
that belong to a student) to one that is thus?”
The words went home. But the effect they produced was
not what the speaker intended. At the time the boy just smiled
and resumed his book. But inwardly he began to think: “Yes,
he is right. What is the use of books and school for me now?”
Immediately the idea took shape in his mind that he must
leave his home and go and live far away, unknown to those
that claimed him as their own.
He had learned before this that his beloved
‘Arunachala’ is the same as Tiruvannamalai, a well-known
place of pilgrimage. He had learned this from a relative;
the latter on returning from a pilgrimage had told him in
answer to his question that he had been to ‘Arunachala’.
This was a great surprise for the lad, who had never
imagined that Arunachala was a place on this earth; the
relative then explained to him that Arunachala is only
another name for Tiruvannamalai.*
* ‘Arunachala’ is the Sanskrit name of the hill, which is itself regarded as
God’s image; the Tamil form of it is ‘Annamalai’; ‘Tiru’ is prefixed to the
name, to show that the place is holy; thus the Tamil name of the place is
Tiru-Annamalai, which is pronounced as Tiruvannamalai.
9\n--- 第21页 ---\nThis place was far enough away from Madura for his
present purpose, but not too far for him to reach. So he decided
to leave home secretly and go there, and thereafter do as he
may be guided by Providence. Fortune favoured his enterprise;
his elder brother’s school-fee for the month had not yet been
paid; and the latter gave him five rupees, which he was told to
pay to the school. Out of this he took just three rupees, thinking
that this would suffice for his journey by rail; the remainder
he left with a letter expressing his decision to go away in
quest of his Divine Father, and insisting that no search should
be made for him.
He purchased a ticket and got into the train at Madura;
but as soon as he had taken his seat, he fell into the Egoless
State, and was in it nearly all the time. He had hardly any
appetite during the journey and ate next to nothing. He had
made a mistake in planning his journey; but this was
providentially set right; he had to walk a part of the way,
because he had not money enough left. But on the way he
obtained some money by pledging his golden ear-ornaments,
and reached Tiruvannamalai by rail.
At once he went to the Presence in the temple and cried
in ecstasy, “Father, I have come just according to Thy
command.” And at once the burning heat in the body
disappeared, and therewith the sense of something being
lacking. Also, there was not any more flow of tears after this
except once, when, much later, he was composing a devotional
hymn for the use of his disciples, which is one of his ‘Five
Hymns to Arunachala.’
Going out of the temple he made a complete change in
his externals: but this he did in a mechanical way, without
thinking and making decisions. A barber’s services were
offered; and presently the lad had a complete shave on his
10\n--- 第22页 ---\nhead. He reduced his dress to a kaupina — or cod-piece —
and he threw on the steps of a tank the remainder of the cash,
clothes and whatever else he had brought with him from his
last place of halt on the journey. All this was done with the
conviction that the body was not himself and did not deserve
to be treated as of any importance. He even omitted the bath
that invariably follows a shave. But a sudden shower of rain
drenched him on his way back to the temple.
For long after this he had no fixed place of abode; he
just sat in any place in which he could remain in the Egoless
State without disturbance from curious or mischievous
people. For long periods he was totally unconscious of the
body and its environment. The people who observed his
ways took it that he was a recluse who had taken a vow of
silence; and so they did not try to make him speak; and he
did nothing to undeceive them; he remained silent. And
this accidental silence continued for many years, so that in
course of time he lost the ability to speak; later, when
disciples came to him and he had to answer their questions,
he had to write his answers; but after a time he recovered
speech, not without some effort.
He never lacked food; for the people recognised his
exalted spirituality and were eager to supply his needs, so
that they might gain the merit of serving a holy one. But he
had, in the beginning, some trouble with mischievous boys,
which however did not disturb his inner peace.
Soon after coming to Tiruvannamalai, as a result of his
continuous experience of the Egoless State, he realised the
truth of the highest of the ancient Revelation: ‘I and my Father
are one.’ Thus he became a perfect Sage. Now he no longer
needed to enter into himself in order to enjoy the happiness
of the real Self; he had it all the time, whether he was aware
of the world or not. He thus became able to fulfil his mission
11\n--- 第23页 ---\nin the world as a Messenger of God — or rather of the real
Self, there being no God but that Self. It is this state of
uninterrupted experience of the real Self, which is known as
the Natural State (Sahajabhava).1
The vigorous search for the missing boy that was made by
his family proved a failure. But some years after his flight they
came to know by mere accident that he was at Tiruvannamalai.
First his uncle, and then his mother, came to him and importuned
him to come back and live near them, if he would not live with
them. But they could make no impression on him; it was as if he
did not recognise their claims on him; such claims were founded
on the assumption that his body was himself.
Much later his mother and younger brother — at that
time the sole surviving brother — came to live with him, and
he let them do so. He took advantage of this opportunity to
instruct and guide his mother on the path to spiritual perfection.
On various occasions during the early part of his life at
Tiruvannamalai the Sage passed through many kinds of trials.
But nothing could ruffle his peace of mind. He exemplifies in
himself the truth expressed in the Gita and other sacred books,
that the man who is firmly established in the Egoless State will
not be moved from it by the severest trials.2 The correct
explanation seems to be that the events of the external world,
including even what happens to the body, are not real to the Sage;
for he dwells in the State of unassailable happiness, a happiness
1. It is next to impossible not to make mistakes in seeking to understand
the true nature of this State. The descriptions given in the books are
mostly tentative, incorporating the ignorance of the disciple; they are
subject to correction by other descriptions. The truth of this State may
be understood to some extent by the discussion of it in Chapter VIII.
`pñ_pÝñWVm o Z X:w IZo Jéw Um{n [dMmë`V o &&
2.
— Bhagavad Gita, 6.22.
12\n--- 第24页 ---\nwhich is so abundant, that it radiates around him, draws to him
disciples and devotees and attaches them to him for life. Indeed
many of them look upon him as God in human form.
It is a curious fact about this Sage that he had never had any
book-knowledge concerning the real Self. The ancient lore, which
reveals as much of the truth of that Self as can be expressed in
words, never came his way; nor was he initiated by anyone into
the secrets of that lore; nor did he even know that there was any
such lore, till long after he had won the State which is their subject-
matter. But when disciples came to him, and some of them wanted
light on the inner sense of certain obscure passages in the sacred
lore, he had to read those books; and he understood their hidden
meanings with perfect ease, because those books described just
that very state — the Egoless State — which he was constantly
enjoying as his own; thus he was able to give out the correct
sense of those passages,— a sense that is beyond the grasp of the
most diligent students of that lore. Thus it happens that this Sage
is an exception to the general rule of the ancient lore, that every
aspirant to the State of Deliverance must become a disciple of a
competent Teacher and be initiated by him into the mysteries.
The competent Teacher is termed a ‘Guru.’*
Another instructive feature of the Sage is that he teaches
more by Silence than by word of mouth. Visitors come to him
from far and near with bundles of questions; but when they take
their seats in his presence after making due obeisance, they forget
to put their questions; and after a time they find that the questions
have evaporated. The would-be questioner either realises that
the questions need no answer, or finds the answers in himself.
The Sage however quite readily answers any question that
is not purely worldly; and when he does answer, his words are
clear, but brief. And as a rule his teachings are free from the
* ‘G’ in this word is pronounced as in ‘gain.’
13\n--- 第25页 ---\ntechnical terms that abound in most of the books. And as he
speaks, so he writes. That may be taken as a proof that he speaks
from his own experience — not from a knowledge of books.
The learned man cannot talk without using the phraseology of
the books he has studied; it may be said that the books master
the man, and not man the books.
The Sage has written a few books, which are all very
brief, but full of meaning. But these he wrote, not because he
himself wanted to write books, but because he was importuned
by certain disciples, who were eager to have a Revelation from
the Sage himself — not being content with the extant sacred
lore. He has also, at the request of disciples, translated some
of the older sacred lore into Tamil. The disciples of this Sage
are in a stronger position than those who have to rely on the
sacred lore of the past. Answers that the Sage has given orally
to questions put to him have also been recorded by disciples.
Disciples come to the Sage from all over the world, and
they profit by his silent influence as well as his teachings,
according to the intensity of their desire for deliverance from
bondage. Their impressions about him vary according to their
mentality. But all recognise that he is a unique person, worthy
of profound veneration. What is the secret of this power in
him? The answer is that he has attained that state of
Deliverance which everyone aspires to, more or less earnestly;
some also find in his presence a foretaste of that state of being.
One particular trait that marks him out as unique is the fact
that neither praise nor censure has any effect on him; he is neither
pleased to hear praise of himself, nor pained by words of censure
or detraction. This may not seem to be very important; but the
fact is that other perfections of character are to be seen in varying
degree in almost any good man, but not so this particular trait;
indeed this is the one trait by which the Sage can be recognised;
14\n--- 第26页 ---\nit is pointed out that even the most saintly of men — if they have
not won the Egoless State — react just like common men to
praise and blame.* So long as even a trace of ego remains, it is
impossible not to be affected by praise or blame; only the Sage
in the Egoless State is unaffected by them.
Being egoless the Sage sees no distinction between himself
and others, nor between one person and another. For him neither
sex, nor fortune, nor social status has any existence; his sense
of equality is absolute; even animals — dogs, cats, birds,
squirrels — he treats as if they were human. And — incredible
as it seems — in his eyes no one is ignorant or a sinner.
Many maintain that a Sage alone can recognise a Sage, and
that therefore no one can positively assert that this one is a Sage.
This is not altogether true; he that is in earnest to find a competent
guide — a Guru — on the path of deliverance has to decide
somehow whether the person he would elect be a Sage or not;
and if he be of pure and devout mind, he will be aided by
divine grace to make the right choice. It is also a help for him,
to understand the profound truths taught in the Sage’s
Revelation; we have already noticed a few of the marks of a
real Sage. A few more will be set down later on.
The mission of a born Sage or Messenger of God is
twofold. He renews and confirms the essentials of the old
Revelation. He also serves as a centre of divine grace to his
disciples — especially to those who, intuitively or through
understanding of the sacred teaching, recognise him as an
embodiment of God, and therefore bear unto him the same
devotion that they formerly bore to God, seeing no distinction
between the two. This is in accordance with the spirit of the
ancient sacred lore, which is expressed in the following verse.
* Refer to Ulladu Narpadu Anubandham verse 37 (see also page 188 and
appendix A, verse 83).
15\n--- 第27页 ---\nB©ûdamo JwéamË_o{V _y{V©^oX{d^m{JZo &
ì`mo_dX²ì`áXohm` X{jUm_²V©`o Z_: && *
“Obeisance to the Lord of Divine Wisdom, infinite like
the sky, who is three in one, as God, the Guru and the Real
Self.” It seems that for one who understands this truth and
becomes a disciple and devotee of the Sage it may not be
quite necessary to go to the Sage and live near him always.
The Sage transcends time and space and is therefore
everywhere.
We shall now make a study of the teachings of all the
Sages, always giving special prominence to those of this Sage.†
* Sureshvaracharya in his Vartika on Sri Sankaracharya’s Dakshinamurti
Stotra.
† The reasons for doing so are discussed in some detail in the chapter on
Authority.
16\n--- 第28页 ---\nChapter 2
Are We Happy?
T
HIS WORLD is to us a means to an end, namely
happiness; at least it is so for most of us. Some there are
who maintain that we are here for the sake of the world, not for
our own sake. What they mean is that we ought not to live for
ourselves, but for the world. But that is quite another matter. The
fact is that we live for ourselves in the first place, and for the
world also in so far as the good of the world happens to be also
our own. That being the case, we shall have to consider, some
time or other, whether we have found happiness, and if not, then
why; we shall have to think over the question whether, in seeking
happiness in and through this world, we have not made some
false assumptions.
We begin life with the belief that happiness can be had
in and through this world. And most people go on believing
thus to the very end. They never pause and think; they do not
take notice of the fact that their hopes of happiness have not
been realised. How then can they consider the further question,
why those hopes have been falsified?
Not all the religions and philosophies of the world can do
for us what we can do for ourselves, if we pause and think; for
what we get from these is just so much mind-lumber — mere
fashions of thought and speech which do not fit in with what
we really are; for only what we find out for ourselves from our
own experience can be of real use to us. Further, we can find
nothing of real value, even from our own experience, if we do
17\n--- 第29页 ---\nnot pause and think. If these religions and philosophies just
hasten the day when we shall pause and think, they shall have
done quite enough for us.
What keeps us from pausing and thinking is the belief
that we are getting — or shall soon get — from life the thing
we want, happiness. The one thing that can possibly shake this
belief is experience of the tragic side of life. We are told by the
Sage of Arunachala that this is Nature’s way; and he gives us
the analogy of dreams to prove it; when we are dreaming of
pleasant things we do not awake: but we do so as soon as we
see visions of a frightful nature. A life of placid enjoyment is
naturally inimical to serious thinking on serious subjects; and
here the religious-minded are no better than the rest of us.
Let us suppose that we have found life disappointing, if
not quite intolerable — that we have found it so either on our
own account, or as representatives of the whole race of men.
We must suppose so, since these inquiries are only for those
that have so found it. In fact many of us have found it so, and
that not once, but again and again.
What have we done each time? We have consulted priests
or astrologers, or prayed to God; these are the popular patent
remedies for the disease that afflicts us all. And these have only
postponed the crisis. And this will be so till we pause and think.
We sought happiness through all the weary years; again
and again we were on the point of winning it and making it ours
for ever; but each time we were deceived; but without pausing to
think — as we shall now do — we simply went on in the same
old way. If now we pause and think,— the thought will occur to
us, that probably we set out on the quest of happiness without a
right understanding of the true nature and source of it.
First let us look at happiness itself and find out what it is.
What we mean by happiness is something constant — something
that will abide with us in all its freshness and purity so long as
18\n--- 第30页 ---\nwe ourselves exist. What the world has given us is not that, but
something transient and variable, and its rightful name is pleasure.
Happiness and pleasure are two entirely different things. But we
assume that pleasures are the very texture of happiness; we
assume that if we can provide for a constant stream of pleasures
for all time we shall secure happiness.
But it is the very nature of pleasure to be inconstant; for
pleasure is just our reaction to the impact of outside things. Certain
things give us pleasure, and we seek to acquire and keep hold of
them; but the same objects do not give equal pleasure at all times;
sometimes they even give pain. Thus we are often cheated of the
pleasure we bargained for, and find that we are in for pain at
times; pleasure and pain are in fact inseparable companions.
The sage of Arunachala tells us that even pleasure is
not from things. If the pleasure that we taste in life were
really from things, then it must be more when one has more
things, less when one has less, and none when one has none;
but that is not the case. The rich, who have an abundance of
things, are not exactly happy; nor are the poor, who have
very little, exactly unhappy. And all alike, if and when they
get sound, dreamless sleep, are supremely happy. To make
sure of the undisturbed enjoyment of sleep we provide
ourselves with every available artificial aid — soft beds and
pillows, mosquito-curtains, warm blankets or cool breezes
and so on. The loss of sleep is accounted a grievous evil; for
its sake men are willing to poison the very source of life, the
brain, with deadly drugs. All this shows how much we love
sleep; and we love it, because in it we are happy.
We are thus justified in suspecting that true happiness
is — as many wise men have told us — something
belonging to our own inner nature. Sages have ever taught
that pleasure has no independent existence; it does not
reside in external objects at all; it appears to do so because
19\n--- 第31页 ---\nof a mere coincidence; pleasure is due to a release of our
own natural happiness, imprisoned in the inner depths of
our being; this release occurs just when, after a rather
painful quest, a desired object is won, or when a hated one
is removed. As a hungry street-dog munching a bare bone,
and tasting its own blood, might think the taste is in the
bone, so do we assume that the pleasures we enjoy are in
the things that we seek and get hold of. It may be said that
desire is the cause of our being exiled from the happiness
that is within us, and its momentary cessation just allows
us to taste a little of that happiness for the time being.
Because we are most of the time desiring to get hold of
something, or to get rid of something, we are most of the time
unhappy. The desire to get rid of something is due to fear. So
desire and fear are the two enemies of happiness. And so long
as we are content to remain subject to them, we shall never be
really happy. To be subject to desire or fear is itself
unhappiness; and the more intense the desire or the fear, the
keener is the unhappiness.
Desire tells us, each time, ‘Now get thou this, and then
you shall be happy.’ We believe it implicitly and set about
getting it. We are unhappy for wanting it, but we forget the
unhappiness in the effort. If we do not get it, we have to suffer.
Neither are we happy if we get it; for desire then finds
something else for us to strive for, and we fail to see how
desire is fooling us all the time. The fact is, desire is like a
bottomless pit which one can never fill up, or like the all-
consuming fire which burns the fiercer, the more we feed it.*
Z OmVw H$m_: H$m_mZm_wn^moJoZ emå`{V &
*
h{dfm H$¥îUdË_o©d ^y` Edm{^dY©Vo &&
— Mahabharatam.
See also Guru Vachaka Kovai vv. 371 & 592 (appendix B, vv.44 & 181).
20\n--- 第32页 ---\nAs desire is without end, so is fear; for the things that
fear tells us to avoid are without end.
Thus we come to this conclusion; so long as desire and
fear have sway over us, we shall never reach happiness. If we
be content to remain in bondage to them, we must, as rational
beings, renounce all hope of happiness.
But knowing that desire and fear are our enemies, can
we not put them away by sheer will-power? The answer that
experience gives is ‘No’. We may, like the Stoics, wrestle
with them and succeed in overcoming them for a time. But
the victory does not last, and finally we give up the fight.
Without help from someone else, we feel, we cannot hope
to achieve lasting deliverance. And who can help us, but
one that has himself conquered desire and fear, and won for
himself perfect happiness?
Such a one we must seek and find, if we are sincerely
and earnestly resolved to become free from these our foes
— the foes of happiness. He alone can show us the path,
and also give the power to tread the path; for he knows
both the goal and the path. The ancient lore tells us — and
we can now see that it does so rightly — that one that is in
earnest for freedom must seek and reverently question one
that is himself free. He that feels acutely the need for a
remedy for the ills that are inseparable from life cannot
help seeking someone who is competent to guide him
aright; he can no more help it, than a sick man can help
going in search of a healer.
There have been men in the past, who had won true
happiness for themselves and were thus able to help others
also; what they taught their own disciples is recorded,
more or less faithfully, in the scriptures of the religions
they are supposed to have founded. But the records as we
21\n--- 第33页 ---\nnow find them are incomplete, and more or less distorted
by the want of clarity of those that wrote them down; the
teachings were given orally; they were not written down
till long after the Teachers had passed away.* They cannot
have for us the same value as the words heard from a
living Teacher; and this not only because we can be sure
that the teaching is genuine, but also — or chiefly —
because the living Teacher is a centre of spiritual power,
which we lack. Such a Teacher is the Sage of Arunachala.
* The incompleteness of the Christian Gospels appears from this: there is
next to nothing in that revelation about freedom and the way to it. There
is just one stray sentence in it, which shows that Jesus must have given
such teaching to at least one disciple. In answer to the question how one
can become free, the Master said: “Know the Truth and let It make you
free.” But there is nothing else in all the four Gospels and the rest of the
New Testament, which could be of any help to the seeker of freedom.
Evidently those disciples to whom Jesus taught this wisdom had no
hand in the writing of the Gospels.
22\n--- 第34页 ---\nChapter 3
Ignorance
T
HE SAGE ALONE can rightly diagnose our ills and
prescribe the right remedy; he alone can unravel the tangled
skein of right and wrong knowledge which fills our minds.
The first thing that the Sages tell us is that the cause of all
our sufferings is in ourselves alone, not outside. The Buddha is
reported to have said: “You suffer from yourselves alone; no
one compels you.” The Sage of Arunachala says the same thing;
in answer to a question whether there is something radically
wrong in the world-scheme itself, he said: “The world is all
right as it is; it is we that are to blame, because of our own
mistaken way of thinking; what we have to do is to trace the
initial error that is at the back of our minds and pluck it out;
then it will be all right.”
This finding and plucking out of our fundamental error
is the only radical cure there is; all other remedies are only
palliatives; the utmost that can be said for them is that in their
own way they help to lead us on to the right remedy. The
religious faiths and practices that divide the world are of value
only to this extent. Often they only enthral and weaken the
mind and thus postpone the day of deliverance.
In fact from this point of view a sincere and earnest sceptic
may be far better off than the bigoted believer — the kind of
believer that has not the sense to see that all these religions are
for humanity, not humanity for the religions; such a one holds
his beliefs, not lightly and tentatively, as something that may
23\n--- 第35页 ---\npossibly be falsified by the actual experience of the Truth — to
which it is only a means — but as the veritable Truth itself. The
so-called sceptic is in truth no sceptic if he believes that there is
something which is true, and that it alone matters; it is safe to
say that he that is devoted to the truth is the best of all devotees.
No believer is worthy of regard if he fails to perceive that truth
is all in all, and that beliefs should be held sacred for the sake
of the truth alone, and not otherwise. Such a one is in a much
worse position than the honest and earnest sceptic, because in
the first place he is very unlikely to take up the inquiry that is
sketched in these chapters. In the second place, if he goes to a
living Sage and seeks guidance from him, he is very likely to
misunderstand what the Sage might tell him; for this reason it
happens that Sages as a rule do not give out all the teachings
they have in them to all questioners alike; they withhold the
deeper truths from those whose minds are unopened; for a truth
that is misunderstood is more fatal than sheer ignorance.*
Whoever, therefore, is willing to be fully instructed by a Sage
must be prepared to put aside his own beliefs; he must not be
fanatically attached to any creed. The open-minded disciple
who has little or no book-knowledge is thus in a better position
than the learned ones with minds enslaved by their creeds.
With open minds, then, we go to the Sage and ask him
why we are in bondage to desires and fears. He replies that it
is so, because we do not know ourselves aright — that we
think ourselves to be something that we are not.
At the first thought it may appear that this answer is
* Tradition tells us that Gautama Buddha once gave an answer by which
the questioner was unsettled in his faith, as he was too immature to
understand the answer aright; on another occasion, when a question
was put to him by another immature visitor, he kept quiet; he later
explained to a disciple that he did so, because any answer that he could
give was sure to be misinterpreted.
24\n--- 第36页 ---\ndoubly wrong. We are unable to see how a right knowledge
of ourselves can be necessary to the business of life; we want
to know how to bend this world to our wills, or as the next
best thing, how to adjust ourselves to the world, so that we
may be able to make the best of the world, bad as it is. We do
not see how knowing ourselves aright can be of any help to us
in all this. In the second place we are fully persuaded that we
do know ourselves all right.
We believe that knowledge is of great value and seek
to know the truth about everything that we might possibly
come across in life; we are even so fanatical in this that we
want to make the acquisition of knowledge compulsory for
all. And all this knowledge concerns the world — not
ourselves. In the course of centuries every single nation or
group of nations had piled up vast heaps of knowledge —
history, geography, astronomy, chemistry, physics, ethics,
theology, biology, sociology, and even what goes by the
proud name of philosophy or metaphysics. If all this be
knowledge, then along with the piling up of these heaps of
it there must have been a steady increase of human happiness.
But this is not the case.
It may be claimed that increase of knowledge has given
us a greater mastery over the blind forces of Nature, and that
this is all to the good. But it is not so. For this mastery has
been placed by an untoward fate in the hands of a few, and the
greater this mastery becomes, the deeper is the degradation
and despair into which the masses sink. And the sense of their
unrelieved misery cannot but poison the cup of happiness —
or seeming happiness — for those among the fortunate few
who are not wholly self-centred. The millennium, which the
scientists of a now forgotten age prophesied, is now farther
off than ever. In fact science has now brought the world to a
state in which the very life of the human race is being seriously
25\n--- 第37页 ---\nthreatened. No; it is sheer wickedness — unworthy of one
that aspires to a pure and untainted happiness — to contend
that all this knowledge has been to the good. And this should
lead us to suspect that this is no knowledge at all. We may at
least suspect that happiness is not to be had through this kind
of knowledge. The teaching of the Sages confirms this
suspicion. The Sage of Arunachala goes even so far as to
characterise all this knowledge as ignorance.
Once a young man fresh from his university — one who
had studied science as his special subject — came to the Sage
and asked him about the “blank wall of ignorance” which faces
the scientist in his quest of the ultimate truth of the universe;
investigating the infinitely small, he was just able to guess at
the existence and behaviour of certain mysterious entities called
electrons, protons, positrons and neutrons, but could not get at
them and know them at first hand, not to speak of finding the
one ultimate substance, the cause of all; on the other hand in
his researches into the infinitely large he could not get beyond
the nebulae or star — dust, supposed to be the raw material of
creation; nor could he discover the secret of the fundamentals
of all objectivity, namely time and space.
The Sage replied that questioning the outside world can
never lead to anything but ignorance; he said that when one
seeks to know anything other than himself, without caring to
know the truth of himself, the knowledge he obtains cannot
possibly be right knowledge.*
This might seem to us a very strange reason for
discrediting all human knowledge at one stroke. But a little
dispassionate thinking will make it clear that the Sage is right.
In the first place, as seen above, this knowledge is already
suspect, because it has failed to promote human happiness.
* See Ulladu Narpadu verse 11 (appendix A, verse 16).
26\n--- 第38页 ---\nIn the second place there is nothing like a real unanimity
among those whom we regard as knowing ones. Often this
want of unanimity does not come to the knowledge of the
general public, because the great majority of those who are
supposed to know are agreed, and they make all the noise,
while the more knowing ones — who strongly disagree from
the majority — are practically silent; and it does often happen
that these are in the right, and not the vocal majority, who are
mostly mediocre minds. The common man assumes that there
is such a thing as science apart from the scientist. But, as in
religion or philosophy, so in science there are differences of
opinion due to differences in natural intelligence and character.
It was observed by Mr. Bernard Shaw that the conversion of a
savage to Christianity is really the conversion of Christianity
to savagery; for the savage does not cease to be one by being
baptised and taught a catechism. The pursuit of truth demands
on the part of a seeker certain perfections of head and heart
which are certainly rare; universal education has certainly not
succeeded in increasing the number of really competent
investigators. Hence it is that with the same data different
people come to different conclusions. Hence we must be
willing to concede that the Sage may be right after all.
The reason given by the Sage is that he that would know
the truth of anything whatever must first know himself aright.
He means that he that does not know himself begins with an
initial error, which falsifies all the knowledge he gains by his
inquiries; from this error the Self-knower is free, and hence
he alone is competent to find the truth of the world or of the
things in the world. The quality of the would-be knower is an
inescapable element in the knowledge gained by him; it would
be right knowledge only if the would-be knower were rightly
equipped for the quest of knowledge.
27\n--- 第39页 ---\nThis is the true explanation of the fact — though many
might deny it — that science has failed. The scientist assumes
that he does not need to know himself aright. In any case, he
starts on his enquiry into objective reality with certain notions
about the self that are wrong.
But do we not know ourselves? We think we do. The
average man is very positive that he knows himself aright; and
it may not be possible for him to realise that he does not, even
if he listens to a Sage. For it requires a very advanced and greatly
purified mind even to perceive and acknowledge the fact that
we do not know ourselves — that those notions about ourselves
that we have cherished all along are mistaken. Sages tell us
that our notions of ourselves are a mixture of truth and error.
Once a few followers of a faith which very vehemently
condemns the use of ‘idols’ came to the Sage and started
questioning him. Their aim was to obtain from him an admission
that it is wrong to worship God in an idol. Their spokesman
asked the Sage: “Has God any form?” The Sage said in reply:
“Who says that God has form?” The questioner then said: “If
God is formless, then is it not wrong to worship Him in an
idol?” The Sage said: “Let God alone: tell me if you have a
form or not.” The questioner promptly answered: “Yes, I have
a form, as you see.” The Sage said: “What! Are you this body,
which is about three and a half cubits in height, dark in colour
and moustached and bearded?” “Yes,” came the answer. “Are
you this in your dreamless sleep also?” “Of course; for on
waking I find myself to be the same.” “Also when the body
dies?” “Yes.” “If so, why does not the body say to the people,
when they are preparing to take it away for burial, ‘No, you
must not take me away. This house is mine and I want to remain
here?’” Then at last the disputant realised his error; he said: “I
was wrong; I am not the body; I am the life that dwells in it.”
Then the Sage explained: “Look here; until now you quite
28\n--- 第40页 ---\nseriously believed that this body is yourself; but now you see
that you were wrong in this; understand that this is the initial
ignorance, out of which grows inevitably all the ignorance that
enslaves men; so long as this primal ignorance remains, it does
not matter much whether you regard God as with form or
formless; but when this primal ignorance goes, then with it
will go all the rest.” The Sage, we thus see, diagnoses the disease
— bondage to desire and fears — as due to ignorance of our
true selves, and the consequent false assumption that the body
is the self. And this is confirmed by the observation that desire
and fear arise because of the body.
Most of us are no wiser than the disputant in this dialogue.
We are all of us fully persuaded that the body — which is so
constantly in our thoughts and which is the object of all our
anxious care — is the self. The above dialogue shows also
that in this belief we are wrong.
In the above dialogue the disputant believed in the
immortality of the Self and hence he could not but
acknowledge that he had been mistaken. But there are the
materialists and the atheists who contend that there is no
Self other than the body. But when we have a Sage for our
instructor, the arguments of these people do not prevail with
us. For the Sage speaks with the authority of direct
experience, and we are far more ready to believe him than
these half-philosophers. But the Sage does not say in so many
words: ‘You must believe me, because I have first-hand
knowledge of this fact’; on the contrary, he seeks to persuade
us by means of arguments based on our own experience.
The full force of these arguments may possibly be difficult
to realise until the whole of his Revelation is mastered; we
shall for the present be satisfied with a brief statement of
them. In the first place the Self has a continuous existence
in all the three states of being known to us, namely waking,
29\n--- 第41页 ---\ndream and sound sleep, while the body exists only in the
first two and not in the third; this will not be quite convincing,
especially to those whose minds are deeply entangled in
materialistic ways of thinking; but even they can see that
there is a state — namely sleep — in which the Self exists
without the body.
Another argument is that the Self is the one indubitable
reality, while the reality of all other things — including the
body and even the mind — is in doubt; this argument will
become understandable when we go through the chapter
on the world. When we realise the full force of these
arguments we shall no more be troubled by the arguments
of the materialists.
But then one may ask: ‘What about those devotees and
philosophers who profess to know that the body is not the
self, who cannot possibly believe that the body and the self
are identical, being steadfast believers in the existence of a
Self distinct from the body? These maintain that the soul is
an extremely subtle being who inhabits the body as one
inhabits a house, using it for a time, and leaving it afterwards
to inhabit another body. Are they not, by their steadfastness
in this belief, protected from this illusion? Are they, too,
ignorant, like the disputant in the dialogue set forth above?’
It is true that they at first believe that by their belief they are
raised to a level above the common people. But in due course
they are disillusioned; they come to see that their knowledge
is purely theoretical — not practical — and that they are in
no way better than the rest; they find themselves still
confounding the body — gross or subtle — with the self,
just as others do. If the body be short, they are short; if it be
tall, they are tall; if it be fair, they are fair; if it be weak and
diseased, they themselves are so, and if it be improved and
made healthy, they themselves are made so. In the same way
30\n--- 第42页 ---\nthey treat the mind as the self; if the mind be alert or joyous
or clear, or the opposite, they themselves are so. The bondage
to desire and fear is not even less than before; it is perhaps
even tighter than before, on account of the added elements
of self-esteem.
We are told by the Sages that we shall cease to identify
ourselves with these bodies — and thus be free once for all
from the sufferings that come through them — only when
we attain direct experience of the real Self. Just as we now
have direct experience of the body as the Self, so we must
have direct experience of that Self as he really is.* This
ignorance is an ingrained habit of thought, which has been
bred in the mind through a long course of wrong acting and
thinking. Out of it have arisen numerous attachments to
things. These thought habits form the very structure of the
mind; and the mere introduction of a contrary thought —
which is a very weak one, just like a newly-born infant —
will make very little difference. The mind will still flow along
the same habit-channels; it will still be subject to the same
attractions and repulsions. And this will be so because, while
it may be possible for the book-learned philosopher to be
able to feel at times that he is not the body, he cannot with
equal facility come to feel that he is not the mind. And this
double ignorance will cease only when the Self is known —
not theoretically, but practically, that is, by actual experience
of the Self.
AmË_mZ§ MoX²{dOmZr`mX`_ñ_r{V nyéf: &
*
{H${_ÀN>Z² H$ñ` H$m_m` eara_Zwg§ÁdaoV² &&
— Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 4.4.12.
“If one becomes conscious of the Self by the experience ‘I am He,’
then for whose sake, and for desire of what thing, shall he be fevered
through the body?”
31\n--- 第43页 ---\nUntil that realisation dawns, the philosopher cannot be
said to have thrown off his ignorance; it survives in all its
vigour. His philosophical lore does not even make any
difference in his character. In fact, as the Sage points out,1 the
book-taught philosopher is even worse off than other men;
his egoism is swelled by the pride of knowledge; his heart is
beset with new attachments — from which the illiterate are
free — which leave him no time for the enterprise of finding
the real Self; often he is even unaware of the very urgent
necessity of preparing himself for that enterprise, by
harmonising the contents of his mind, and directing its energies
towards the Self, instead of the world. Hence it follows that
he that knows the Self from books alone, knows it no more
than humbler folk; for this reason the Sage likens him to a
gramophone; he is no better for his book-lore than the
gramophone is for the good things it repeats.2
Books, we should remember, are no more than signposts
on the road to the wisdom that makes us free; that wisdom is
not in the books themselves. For the Self that we need to know
is within, not outside; if and when the eye of wisdom is opened,
the Self will be found shining in all its glory, directly, without
any medium; but the study of books engenders the notion that
the Self is something outside, needing to be known as an
object, through the medium of the mind.
The vast confusion that prevails in philosophical and
theological speculations is due, says the Sage, to this ignorance.
Everyone is fully persuaded that the abstruse questions
concerning the world, the soul and God can be settled finally
and satisfactorily by intellectual speculation sustained by
arguments drawn from common human experience, which is
1 See Ulladu Narpadu Anubandham v. 36 (appendix A, v. 82).
2 See Ulladu Narpadu Anubandham v. 35 (appendix A, v. 81).
32\n--- 第44页 ---\nwhat it is because of this ignorance. Philosophers and
theologians have disputed from the very beginning of creation
— if there was a creation — about the first cause, the mode of
creation, the nature of time and space, the truth or otherwise of
the world, the conflict of fate and freewill, the state of
deliverance, and so on without end; but no finality has been
reached. The Sage explains to us that there can be no final
conclusion — such that it cannot be upset by new, or seemingly
new, arguments advanced by fresh disputants — unless and
until the real Self is realised; for him that has realised that Self
these controversies come to an end; but for others they must
continue, unless they hearken to the advice of the Sage, which
is to the effect that they should leave all these questions on one
side and devote themselves whole-heartedly to the quest of the
Self. Either we must accept the teaching of Sages on these
matters at least tentatively, so that we shall no more be diverted
from the quest by these disputes, or we should recognise the
profound truth that these questions are of no importance at all,
and need no answer — that the one thing needed is to find the
Self; for these questions arise, if at all, only to those that look
upon the mind or the body as the Self.*
We thus understand that all our sufferings are due to our
ignorance of the real Self. This ignorance must be removed,
if we are ever to enjoy real happiness; for removal of the cause
is the only radical cure there is; all else is only palliative
treatment, which may even do harm in the long run by actually
adding to the disease. And we can get rid of this ignorance
only by actual experience of the Self.
This is no easy task; for the instrument by which we
must work at it is the mind; it has to be turned aside from all
else and towards the true Self; but the mind does not readily
* See Ulladu Narpadu v. 34 (appendix A, v. 39).
33\n--- 第45页 ---\nturn aside from its customary preoccupations; if forcibly
turned aside it does not stay so, but soon turns back to them.
This is because the mind is full of notions which are the
progeny of this ignorance; and these notions naturally rise up
in arms to defend the life of their parent, this ignorance; for
its life is also their own. We have therefore to liquidate all
these notions.
Because these notions are the progeny of this primary
ignorance, they are presumably false. And it stands to reason
that false knowledge is inimical to the dawn of the Truth.
Therefore also it is needful for us to examine these notions
and reject them if they are found to be incorrect, or even if
only doubtful; thus alone shall we be secure against traitorous
outbreaks behind us, when we are engaged in the quest of
the real Self.
In this examination we must be guided by absolute
devotion to the Truth; the Gita tells us: “He that loves the
Truth and subdues his whole being to the love of the Truth,
shall find it.”* This condition is very important. Surely there
can be no partial love of the Truth; such love implies a love of
untruth in greater or less degree. Perfect love of the Truth
means a perfect readiness to renounce whatever shall be found
to be untrue, as a result of an impartial examination. It also
implies ability to submit to a thorough examination all the
beliefs we now have about the world, the soul and God, without
attachment to those beliefs. It is the mark of the Truth-lover
that he is no more attached to his own beliefs than to those of
another; he holds those beliefs tentatively and can calmly
contemplate the possibility of finding that they are untenable
and worthy to be renounced. It is the freedom from attachment
to one’s own beliefs that enables him to make an impartial
lÓmdm±ëb^Vo kmZ§ VËna: g§`VopÝX«`: &&
* — Gita, 4.39.
34\n--- 第46页 ---\nexamination of their validity. And if as a result of such
examination he finds that they are invalid, he not only
renounces them, but is ever on his guard against their possible
return, until they lose their power on him. Therefore we must
see to it, that we shall be devoted to the Truth and the Truth
alone, untainted by errors. And for its sake we must renounce
the love we bear to our present beliefs, so that the Truth may
reign supreme in our hearts when we have found it.
What is known as philosophy is just this impartial
scrutiny of all our notions — of the entire contents of our
minds. This alone is true philosophy. All else is pseudo-
philosophy; and it is safe to say that pseudo-philosophers
are those who have either not understood the fact they
are ignorant of the Self, or are quite content to remain in
subjection to that ignorance.
We shall now consider how to make sure that in our
philosophising we shall avoid the pitfalls that lurk in our path
and arrive at notions which shall not be inimical to our pursuit
of the Quest of the true Self.
35\n--- 第47页 ---\nChapter 4
Authority
W
E HAVE SEEN that before taking up the Quest of
the real Self — whereby we shall become free from
bondage to desire and fear — we have to prepare ourselves
for it by revising our ideas and casting off those that are at all
likely to hamper the pursuit of the Quest. This revision of our
present ideas — as a preparation for the Quest — is called
philosophy; for philosophy is a means, and not an end in itself.
But there are philosophies and philosophies. Unless it
is of the right kind, it will, instead of leading us to the Quest,
actually lead us deeper into the ignorance that is the cause
of all our ills. The right kind of philosophy is an impartial
criticism of all our present notions about the three things,
the world, the soul and God. Those philosophies whose aim
is to confirm these notions are inimical to success in the
Quest; they are to be avoided.
Philosophy, therefore, to be really helpful, must begin
with a recognition of the primary ignorance that is pointed
out in the foregoing chapter. This means that all our present
ideas are suspect, for the reason given by the Sage, and
explained in the same chapter. They must be subjected to a
thorough criticism, and replaced by other ideas which shall
be unobjectionable and helpful to the Quest.
In the course of this criticism we shall need to consider
the evidence for or against the validity of our ideas. But the
evidence we are to rely upon must be of the right kind.
36\n--- 第48页 ---\nWhat is the right kind of evidence? Is it the common
experience of men? That experience is the outcome of the
primary ignorance! To rely on such evidence would only result
in giving the stump of philosophical truth to the ideas we
criticise. We require evidence of a different kind.
We can now understand how it happens that philosophy
has earned a name for futility. It is undeniable that philosophies
have as a rule failed to give us any real help in solving the
riddle of life. This has been particularly so in the West. This
failure was evidently due to their use of evidence of the wrong
kind. They used as evidence the common experience of
mankind, which, as we have seen, is bad as being the offspring
of our ignorance. And they used this wrong kind of evidence,
because they began their philosophies without a recognition
of this ignorance. Naturally they arrived at conclusions which
confirmed that ignorance and barred the way to Deliverance.
Some tell us that the body is the Self. Others say that the
mind is the Self. Both agree in asserting that the world is real,
and that the Self is an individual, one of a vast multitude of
selves. Some there are who admit that the Self is neither the
body, nor the mind as we know it, but imagine that there is a
superior kind of mind which is the real Self. All these views
agree in making it out that the Self is finite. But finiteness is
the cause of bondage. If, as these philosophers say, the Self is
really finite — finite in its very nature — then we must bid
good-bye to all hope of becoming free. Thus there is no vital
difference among these views. These philosophies cannot at
all help us in getting rid of our primary ignorance.
He that would philosophise aright must avoid the
mistakes of these philosophers. He must choose his evidence
aright. He must seek and find evidence of experience which
is not the outcome of the ignorance.
37\n--- 第49页 ---\nReliable evidence, therefore, is not the experience of
ignorant men, but that of the Sages, who are wholly free from
this ignorance. Only on the basis of their experience can we
build up a philosophy that would relax the grip that this
ignorance now has on us, and thus make it possible for us to
start on the Quest and pursue it to the very end, so that we
may win similar experience for ourselves.
That the truth cannot be reached without evidence other
than the experience of common humanity was felt by Prof.
James of America. He sought to supply that need to the best of
his power in his book Varieties of Religious Experience. In that
book he made free use of the contents of another book, namely
Cosmic Consciousness by Dr. Bucke. The evidence gathered
into these books is that of exceptional men. But all this evidence
has been treated uncritically, because the authors had no clear
notion of the primary ignorance. There are at least three classes
of exceptional men, and all of them are not of the same grade.
That is to say, those who have given evidence of exceptional
experiences belong to one of three classes, namely Yogis, Saints
and Sages. We need to discriminate among them and find out
which of these are the proper witnesses in our inquiry.
The evidence of the Yogis is unreliable, because they
have not transcended the realm of ignorance. This is seen in
the fact that they differ among themselves. The same is the
case with the Saints. The Sages do not differ among
themselves, because they have transcended the ignorance.
No Sage ever contradicts another Sage. Revelation tells
us that all Sages are one; we shall be able to recognise the
correctness of this teaching later on.
As between the Yogis and the Saints the latter are far more
worthy to be followed than the former, though we need to
discriminate between Saint and Saint, because — as we shall
see in the chapter on Devotion — their views differ according
38\n--- 第50页 ---\nto the degree of their ripeness; the nearer they are to sagehood,
the wiser are their utterances. And there are Saints whose
utterances are of a mischievous tendency. We also find that the
Saints have moods, or rather that moods have them, which is
not the case with the Sages.
The experiences of the Yogis are highly complex and
therefore their descriptions have an irresistable fascination
for us. But the fact is, they are not even conscious of the empire
that the ignorance has over them. Their goal is not the ending
of the ignorance, but the attainment, within the realm of the
ignorance, of a glorious status that seems to them worthy of
being striven for. They are persuaded that the mind itself is
the Self. And this is the case even when they deny it. They
believe in a blissful existence in which the mind shall survive,
though infinitely glorified and endowed with wonderful
powers. This they consider to be the highest possible gain.
Some of them are more ambitious still. They hope to be able,
after winning these powers — which they wrongly call
Deliverance — to obtain control over the world and then to
change it beyond recognition — to erect a tangible heaven on
earth. The Saints are free from these ambitions.
That neither Yogis nor Saints can have a right vision of
the Truth was clearly pointed out by the Sage Sankara. In his
Viveka Chudamani (verse 365) he tells us that the vision of
the Truth obtained by non-Sages is apt to be distorted by the
interference of the mind, which is not the case with the Sages.*
According to the Sages this glorified mind of the Yogis
is but a body of a subtler kind. The notion that this is the Self
is simply the primary ignorance in a more dangerous form.
[Z{d©H$ëng_m{YZm ñ\w$Q>§ ~«÷VÎd_dJå`Vo Y«wd_² &
*
ZmÝ`Wm MbV`m _ZmoJVo: àË``mÝVa{d{_lV§ ^doV² &&
39\n--- 第51页 ---\nThe common man is in fact in a much better state than the
Yogi; for the latter has only gone deeper into the ignorance
and postponed the day of Deliverance.
With all due respect, therefore, to the Yogis, we must
reject their evidence. The Saints as a class are worthy of
reverence. But for the present we must put on one side their
evidence also, and build up our philosophy on the evidence
of the Sages alone. But after we shall have done this, we may
take up the evidence of the Saints and make a study of it in
the light of the teachings of the Sages. This study has a great
value for us, as we shall see in due course.
There have been Sages in every age down to the present.
Their testimony has come down to us enshrined in certain books
called Upanishads or Vedantas. There are many passages in the
books which carry conviction straight to the heart. In fact it is
the Heart of all life, the Real Self, that speaks to us in them.
The student is thus simultaneously aware of two things — that
the teaching is true, and that the teacher is a Sage.
But there can be no doubt that the earnest disciple would
prefer to these books the words of a living Sage, if he can find
one. There can be honest doubt about the genuineness of the
texts of the ancient Revelation. But we can have none whatever
of the genuineness of the teachings of a living Sage. And we
are on much stronger ground if the Sage has himself written
down his teachings. There is also this further advantage; if
we happen to be in doubt about the correct meaning of any
passage, we can apply to the best possible commentator,
namely the giver of the Revelation, the Sage himself.
The disciples of the Sage of Arunachala are therefore in
a much better position than those that rely on the older books,
or on pandits who have studied those books. The Sage has
written down his teachings, and has himself explained the
meanings of some of the passages. He has also given oral
40\n--- 第52页 ---\nanswers to a great many questions that have been put to him
from time to time, and these answers have been recorded fairly
accurately by disciples.* Of course, apart from these
considerations, it is a great thing to attach oneself to a living
Sage, as the older Revelation tells us. Those that fail to do so
are losing a great chance. It is not possible for a teacher who
is not a Sage — who is just a pandit and nothing more — to
understand the spirit of the ancient Revelation. Still less is it
possible for him to rouse the spiritual energies that are latent
in the disciple, for the reason that he himself has not had them
roused. It is necessary that the Guru or Master that is to teach
us should himself be the embodiment of that Wisdom which
he is to impart to us.
The teaching of our Sage is therefore for us the new
Revelation. And for the reasons pointed out, this Revelation
is the most authoritative for us. We should take it as the chief
basis of our philosophy, and utilise the older Revelation also,
in so far as it may serve to explain or complete the teaching.
There is, of course, the unexpressed view of orthodox
pandits, namely that the ancient Revelation is the primary
authority, and that the words of a living Sage are authoritative
only as echoes of that Revelation. We shall come to this view
later on. Just now we shall seek to obtain a clear and rational
notion of what is known as authority.
Authority is just the testimony of the Sages, giving us an
idea of their own experience of the True Self, transcending
the ignorance. It is called authority, because it is the only
reliable evidence we can have about the True Self and the
state of deliverance, so long as we ourselves are subject to
that ignorance.
* e.g. Maharshi’s Gospel, Books I & II and Talks with Sri Ramana
Maharshi, etc. (— Publisher).
41\n--- 第53页 ---\nThere is an apparent conflict between authority and reason.
A European student of philosophy who for some years sat at the
feet of the Sage once remarked to the Sage that, as history shows,
this is the ‘age of reason,’ and hence it is necessary that the
teaching we shall listen to and accept must be in accordance
with reason. The Sage replied as follows: “Whose is the intellect?
You must answer ‘My intellect.’ So the intellect is your tool, You
use it for measuring variety. It is not yourself, nor is it something
independent of yourself. You are the abiding reality, while the
intellect is just a phenomenon. You must find and get hold of
yourself. There is no intellect in dreamless sleep. There is none
in a child. The intellect develops with age. But how could there
be any development or manifestation of the intellect without the
seed of it in sleep or childhood? Why go to history to discover
the fundamental fact? The degree of truth in history is the same
as the degree of truth in the historian.”
We may put it this way. The usefulness of the intellect is
limited by its origin, namely the primary ignorance. To those
that are unaware of their subjection to this ignorance, and to
those also who are content to remain in subjection to it, the
intellect is a good enough tool for all their purposes. That is to
say, it is an excellent tool in the service of that ignorance. But
for the purpose of transcending it, it is of little use. The utmost
that the intellect can do for us is to recognise its own limitations
and cease to hinder our Quest of the Truth. This it can do as
soon as it begins to realise the fact of its own tainted origin and
of the necessity of relying on the evidence of the Sages as a
step in aid of the Quest, by which an authentic Revelation of
the True Self can be won. Thus the conflict between reason
and Revelation is only apparent.
Our reliance on the testimony of the Sages is not
unreasonable, also because such reliance is only tentative.
The Sages tell us about the real Self and the way to obtaining
42\n--- 第54页 ---\nthe direct Experience of that Self, not that we may blindly
believe whatever they tell us, but that we may verify their
teaching by our own Experience of the truth of that Self.
The essential part of their teaching is not what they tell us
about the State of Deliverance or the true nature of the Self,
but what they tell us about the method of winning that State.
That is why this Sage always tells the disciple, to begin with,
that he must find the Self by means of the Quest taught by
himself. Whatever else he teaches is auxiliary to the Quest.
And we are to accept all this teaching only tentatively, so
that we may be able to take up the Quest and carry it through
to the point of success.
All sense of conflict between reason and faith in the
Guru will vanish as we proceed in the study of the teaching.
The Sages as a rule appeal to our own experience as worldly
men; and the Sage of Arunachala is no exception. It is true,
as we saw already, that our experience is discredited as the
offspring of the primary ignorance. But even out of it the
Sages are able to pick out facts that make it easier for us to
accept their teaching, revolutionary as it seems to be at almost
every step. The light that they shed on our own past
experience enables us to see that, in truth, there is no real
conflict between faith and reason.
This being the true nature of what has been called
authority, it follows that in the last resort everyone is his own
authority. Before accepting the teaching of a Sage as
authoritative, he must decide for himself whether or not he is
a Sage — a person having intimate Experience of the Real
Self, and established, by virtue of that Experience, in the State
of Deliverance, which he himself wants to attain. He must
come to the conclusion that the person in question is in the
enjoyment of unalloyed and uninterrupted happiness, due to
his freedom from desire and fear, the two enemies of
43\n--- 第55页 ---\nhappiness. The disciple is not asked to surrender his reason,
until he finds one to whom he can surrender it with the prospect
of incalculable gain. The Sage to whom he makes this
surrender becomes his Guru or Master.
It is not possible to lay down clear rules to guide the
novice in the delicate business of recognising a Sage. And it
may be said that no rules are really necessary. He that is
destined to find a Sage and to become his disciple will find
no practical difficulty in recognising him when he finds him.
For those that are not so destined, rules will be of little use.
Divine Grace plays a decisive part in the process by which
the Sage is recognised as such and accepted as one’s own
Guru. But when once the choice is made, the disciple can
use the available tests of sagehood, in order to confirm his
choice. The chief test is serenity and unruffled happiness,
which is the same as perfect peace. Another test is
egolessness, and this is proved chiefly by indifference to
praise and censure, as noted before. Other tests will appear
in the course of this exposition.
We shall now discuss the notion of authority, which is
upheld by the orthodox pandit, who has not sat at the feet of a
Sage. This notion is as follows. There are certain books which
are unquestionably authoritative in their entirety, because they
are of divine origin. Every sentence or clause of a sentence in
them is divine, and it is not permissible to us to doubt their
authenticity and authority. It is said that the books ‘prove
themselves’ — that they are ‘svatahpramanam.’ In this sense
authority is a kind of spiritual dictatorship imposed from
without. The subservience of the seeker of the Truth goes
further still. Not only must he accept the sacred lore as
authoritative, but he must also bind himself in advance to
accept the interpretations of disputed passages which these
pandits offer.
44\n--- 第56页 ---\nThis notion is one of the many untoward effects of the
organisation of religions into churches or hierarchies. It must
be said that this notion is good enough for the man who is
content to live and die in ignorance. He that wills to rise above
it needs authority of a different kind.
Even the sacred lore is of relative value* and needs
evidence of some kind to prove its worth. There is only one
thing that proves itself, namely the Self.
The upholders of the orthodox view do not recognise the
testimony of a living Sage as having any authority of its own.
They believe that a special sacredness attaches to the ancient
lore, and that no additions can be made to it.
But the truth is the other way about. The reason for the
authoritative nature of the ancient lore is the fact that it contains
passages, which are more or less faithful records of the
testimony of Sages that lived in the past. And Sages are the
same at all times. As the ancient lore itself tells us, they are
not in time, but transcend it. Further in the sacred lore we
have the injunction that we should receive instruction from a
living Sage. The truth is that the Sage is not a person, but an
embodiment of Divinity, as the Gita (7.18) tells us in the words
kmZr ËdmË_d¡ ,
“The Sage is Myself”; and this — which is one
of the fundamental teachings of the ancient lore — seems to
be insufficiently understood by the pandits.
Besides, the most natural way for us is to start with the
teaching of a living Sage; for we are able to determine by our
intuitive perception whether the teacher is a Sage or not. We
cannot thus judge any Sage of the past.
Besides, we can never be quite sure that the books as we
now find them are a faithful record of what the Sages had
said. It seems probable that these books are made up of the
* See Guru Vachaka Kovai verse 147 (appendix B, verse 82).
45\n--- 第57页 ---\nactual utterances of Sages and other passages composed by
philosophers who were not Sages. It would seem that the
evidentiary texts remained unrecorded for a long time before
they were incorporated into the books. During the interval
the texts must have been preserved by oral tradition, which
may account for the fact that the same passages occur in
different books, but with variations.
The claim that is made for the ancient lore is based on
its being prior in time. But priority in time is no consideration
at all in any inquiry in which the validity of time itself as an
objective reality is in question, as we shall see in due course.
Our first reliance therefore shall be on the testimony of
the Sage of Arunachala; we shall make use of the ancient lore
by way of amplification or commentary.
46\n--- 第58页 ---\nChapter 5
The World
WE HAVE SEEN that the truth of the Self will reveal
Itself when the mind persists in the Quest of the Self,
actuated by the resolve to find that Truth. This the mind can do
if it be not deflected from the Quest by extraneous thoughts.
The mind that is not so deflected is an apt instrument for finding
the Self. In the case of the Sage of Arunachala the mind was
such an apt instrument, because it was untainted by desires or
attachments which could raise a current of thoughts diverting
the mind from the Quest. For such a one it is unnecessary to
engage in discussions about the world. Says the Sage: “Of what
use are disputes about the world, saying that it is real, that it is
an illusory appearance, that it is conscious, that it is insentient,
that it is happy, that it is miserable? All men alike love the
Egoless State, which is won by turning away from the world
and knowing the untainted real Self which transcends the
assertions that It is one or that It is manifold.*
Here the Sage makes a statement which at first would seem
to be inaccurate. He says that all of us are lovers of the Egoless
State, which is to be won by turning aside from the world; and
since we are to turn our backs on the world after all, it does not
matter to us what the world may be. But few are the persons who
have heard of the Egoless State. And still fewer are those that
want that State. What then does the Sage mean by saying that all
men without exception are devotees of that State?
* Ulladu Narpadu verse 3 (see appendix A, verse 8).
47\n--- 第59页 ---\nThe Sage himself has furnished the explanation, which is
in perfect harmony with the teachings of the ancient lore. It is as
follows. It is true that not all are conscious lovers of the Egoless
State. But unknowingly they do love that State. And they show
that love by their great partiality to a state which has great
resemblance to the Egoless one, namely the state of dreamless
sleep. This state is far inferior to the Egoless State, as we shall
see later. It is a happy state, but its happiness bears no comparison
at all with that of the Egoless State. However, it is exactly similar
to the Egoless State in being egoless and worldless. It will be
seen later that its egolessness is imperfect. Because it is egoless,
it is also worldless; and this it is that makes it happy. The Sage
tells us that one that is in love with sleep, in spite of its
imperfection, cannot be heard to say that he does not love the
Egoless State. For this reason, if only we knew what it is that we
really want, it would be unnecessary for us to discuss the world.
It is the Self that should interest us, not the not-Self. Therefore,
says the Sage, it is absurd to investigate the not-Self, as it would
be absurd for a barber to scrutinise the heaps of shorn hair, instead
of putting it in the dustbin.*
All inquiries about the not-Self are vain, if not
mischievous, because it delays the main enterprise, the Quest
of the Self. And this is so, even if one arrives at the correct
conclusion about the nature of the world, if he does not then
at least commence that Quest.
But for those that are in earnest to find the Self, without
being able to pursue the Quest with one-pointed mind, this
inquiry is neither unnecessary nor undesirable. The necessity
arises thus. Most men, even those that are in earnest to be
delivered from bondage, are hindered in the pursuit of the
Quest by unwanted thoughts that arise and fill the mind.
* See Guru Vachaka Kovai verse 1076 (appendix B, verse 212).
48\n--- 第60页 ---\nThe habitual flow of the mind is towards the world, not
towards the Self; even when one succeeds in turning the mind
away from the world and concentrating it on the Self, it breaks
loose and wanders back to the world.
But why do thoughts intrude into the mind even when
they are not wanted? The Sages say it is because we have the
belief that the world is real.
The Sage of Arunachala tells us in one of his compositions
that but for our belief that the world is real, it would be quite
easy for us to obtain the Revelation of the Self.† The greatest
wonder, says the Sage, is this — that, being always the real
Self, we are striving to become one with Him.* He tells us that
a day will dawn when we will have to laugh at our present
efforts to that end. But that which will be realised on that day
of laughter exists even now as the Truth. For we are not to
become that Self; we are He.
It may be asked what this belief of ours has to do with the
Quest. One reason is this. Whatever we hold to be real has an
unquestionable right of entry into the mind; thoughts regarding
realities cannot be denied admittance by a mere fiat of the will.
But that is not all. We now regard the world as real in a sense in
which it is not real. And by so regarding it we make it impossible
for ourselves to realise the Self, until we give up our false belief.
It so happens that the very thing that obscures the Self for us is
the world itself.
How can that be? The Sages tell us that the Self is the
Reality underlying the world; just as, when a rope is mistaken
for a snake, the snake obscures the rope, so the world obscures
the Self. There is only one Reality, which in our ignorance
appears to us as the world, and will appear as it really is, as
† See Appendix B, Verse 4.
* See Guru Vachaka Kovai verse 622 (appendix B, verse 96).
49\n--- 第61页 ---\nthe Self, when we transcend the ignorance. When we shall
Experience the Truth, we shall find that what now appears to
us as this multiple world of names and forms in time and
space is just the real Self, who is the indivisible Reality,
nameless, formless, timeless, spaceless and changeless. And
it is axiomatic that appearance excludes the reality; as long as
the rope is supposed to be a snake, it cannot appear as the
rope it really is; the false snake effectually conceals the real
rope. The same is the case with the Self. So long as the Self
appears to us as the world, we shall not realise Him as the
Self; the world-appearance effectually conceals the Self; and
it will do so until we get rid of the appearance; and we cannot
do so unless we understand that the world-appearance is
unreal. For this reason the Reality — which is also the Self
— is practically non-existent for him that believes the world
to be real, just as the rope is non-existent for him that sees it
as a snake. For this reason he is a nastika (atheist), even though
he may honestly believe that there is a Reality.
Thus it happens that, because of this false belief, the Self,
who is infinitely great and blissful, and who is our dearest
possession, if we may call Him a possession, is for the time
being lost to us. And what greater loss can there be?
But the idea of a self is innate to us. It is not open to us
even to doubt the existence of a self of some sort. The Self is
the only indubitable reality there is; if anyone questions the
reality of the Self, he would at once put himself out of court; to
be able to raise any question at all, he must admit he exists.
Therefore it happens that, feeling the void due to the obscuring
of the real Self, we fill it up with a false self.
But since the world is taken as real, and we are unable to
think of any reality beyond the world, we have to locate this
hypothetical self in the world. And this can be only by
identifying the Self with the body. And as there are two bodies,
50\n--- 第62页 ---\nthe physical or gross one and the mental or subtle one, we
cannot escape taking one or both of them as the Self. It needs
to be understood that in both ways we fall into ignorance; the
real Self is neither the body nor the mind, as we shall see later.
By this ignorance we are disabled from conceiving of a real Self
transcending both mind and body. Thus unless we are willing to
renounce the belief that the world is real as such — that is, as the
world — we shall never realise the real Self that the Sages
have testified to. And this means that to get rid of the primary
ignorance we must renounce the belief that the world is real,
unless our minds are of such exceptional purity and harmony
that we can put away all thought about the world and the body
while engaged in the Quest. Therefore we need to listen to
what the Sages tell us about the world, and accept their
teaching at least as tentatively true.
The Sage of Arunachala tells us that the world is both
real and unreal; and he tells us also that there is no self-
contradiction in this. The world is real in one sense and unreal
in another. The world is real because that which appears as
the world is the Reality, which is the real Self; it is unreal,
because, considered as world, it is a mere appearance of the
Reality. Apart from the Reality the world has no existence.
But its appearance as the world does not affect the Reality;
for It never really became the world, just as the rope never
really became a snake.
Thus we are taught that the world as such is unreal. It is
not wholly unreal, because there is something — the Reality,
the Self — behind the false appearance. The meaning is that
the Reality, being obscured by the world, does not appear to
us as It really is. This teaching is briefly referred to as maya-
vada; the world is declared to be maya, an illusory appearance
of the Reality. Maya may be defined as that mysterious Power
which makes the Real appear as something which It is not.
51\n--- 第63页 ---\nThis teaching has come in for a great deal of violent
criticism. It is asserted that the teaching is not to be found in the
Upanishads — that it is an invention of more recent writers, which
was adopted by Bhagavan Sri Sankara. For us, the controversy is
set at rest by the testimony of the Sage of Arunachala.
The teaching that the world is maya only states a principle
known to and admitted by all, namely that things are not what
they seem. Modern science, especially physics, has gone far
towards confirming it as the fundamental principle of matter.
Whereas the Reality is One, indivisible, unchangeable,
untainted, formless, timeless and spaceless, our minds picture
It as manifold, broken up into an infinite number of fragments,
subject to change, tainted by desire, fear and sorrow, confined
in forms, and limited in time and space. This rather long and
complicated statement is summarised by the statement that
all this is maya. The school of Vedanta which accepts this
teaching is called Advaita.
Those that are repelled by this teaching are not asked
to accept it. It is offered only to those that have realised that
the cause of bondage is ignorance, and earnestly desire to
get rid of it. Their point of view is fundamentally different
from that of other people, and the teaching given to them is
naturally different.
The merit of this teaching lies in its giving us a synthesis
of two apparently unconnected teachings of the ancient lore,
namely that the Reality is the material Cause of the world,
and that it remains unaffected, transcending all duality. Those
that are determined to believe that the Reality has really
become all this multiplicity are not called upon to accept the
teaching; for them the ancient lore and Sages have provided
other ways of spiritual progress. The Sages are not at all
annoyed if these people assert that their way is alone the right
way. But if ignorance is to be transcended, there is no escape
52\n--- 第64页 ---\nfrom accepting this teaching; for if the world be real as such,
there would be no unchangeable Reality, without which there
can be no Deliverance.
Thus the teaching about the world is really two-fold. But
that part of the teaching which says that the real Self is the
Truth underlying the world appearance, is separable from the
other part. Besides, the latter part — namely that the world is
not real as such — is of greater value to us to begin with, because
it serves as an antidote to the false belief that the world is real
as such. The former part of the teaching is also more difficult
of comprehension. Hence the Sages recommend the cultivation
of the belief that the world is unreal, even though it is not the
whole truth about the world. Those who are unable to assimilate
the whole teaching would be on the safe side if they accept that
part of it which says that the world is unreal.
This will be the safe course, because the alternative to
the view of the world’s unreality often is that the world is real
as world. For the average mind is so made that it cannot be
held in suspense on any question that is raised; it must have
an answer one way or other to any question that is raised.
Reasons for the view that the world is unreal as such are
given in ample measure. We shall now consider these.
The first reason is the fact of the ignorance that is at the
root of all our experience. Once the Sage was asked the
following question: “How can I accept the teaching that the
world — which I am sensing all the time in so many ways —
is not real?” The Sage answered: “This world, which you try
to prove to be real, is all the time mocking at you for seeking
to know it, without your first knowing yourself!” If once we
realise that we do not know ourselves aright, how can we
pretend that we know the world aright? The Sage has expressed
this argument as follows: “How can the knowledge of objects
arising in relative existence to one that knows not the truth of
53\n--- 第65页 ---\nhimself, the knower, be true knowledge? If one rightly knows
the truth of him named ‘I’, in whom both knowledge and its
opposite subsist, then along with ignorance (relative)
knowledge also will cease.”*
To one that can feel the full force of this argument no
further discussion is needful. The teaching that the world is
not real as such will become self-evident as soon as one comes
to feel that ignorance of the Self is the one source of all worldly
knowledge. But meanwhile some more detailed discussion
of the question will be useful.
The second reason is that our belief that the world is real
as such is not based on any reliable evidence. We shall
presently discuss the evidence offered in proof of the reality
of the world. But first we need to meet an objection that may
be raised.
It may be objected that in asserting that there is no
satisfactory proof of the reality of the world we are simply
throwing the burden of proof on the other side — on him that
says that the world is real. The answer to this is that the burden
of proof does lie on him that asserts the existence of the world;
the burden of proof does not lie on him that denies its existence.
In courts of law it is a rule of evidence that the burden of
proof lies on him that asserts something, not on him that is
content with a denial of the assertion; and this is a perfectly
sound rule. There is no reason why a different rule should be
observed in philosophy. The reason for this rule is that a denial
is usually incapable of proof, while an assertion of something
positive — as that something exists — is capable of proof.
The one that denies is thus entitled to win his case if the
assertor is not able to let in clear evidence of the existence of
the thing asserted by him. If the assertor fails to adduce clear
* Ulladu Narpadu verse 11 (see appendix A, verse 16).
54\n--- 第66页 ---\nand unobjectionable evidence to prove his case, the judgement
will go against him. Thus the burden of proof is rightly thrown
on those that contend that the world is real as such. We shall
examine the evidence that is adduced by them, and if the
evidence be inconclusive, we shall have to conclude that their
case is baseless.
Of course there is the clear evidence of the Sages
which is decisive; but we need not refer to it for the present.
Before we begin this discussion we need to set up a
standard of reality which shall be rigorously applied. We
cannot make use of the standard of reality that is in common
use, because it is an instrument of the primal ignorance that
vitiates all our knowledge. We must go to the Sages for a
standard of reality that would guide us aright. This standard
of reality is thus expressed: That alone is real which exists
unchanged and without intermission. This means that things
whose existence is limited by time or space, are not real. This
test of reality has been handed down from time immemorial
and is found recorded in the Bhagavad Gita (Ch. II, 16) as
follows:
ZmgVmo {dÚVo ^mdmo Zm^mdmo {dÚVo gV: &
“Existence never
belongs to the unreal, nor does non-existence belong to the
Real.” We see the same test of reality implied in the
Chhandogya Upanishad, where reality and appearance are
contrasted. Acharya Gaudapada, who is reverenced by Sage
Sankara as an adept in the meaning of the sacred lore as handed
AmXmdÝV o M
down by tradition, states the test of reality thus:
`ÞmpñV dV©_mZo@{n VÎmWm &
(Mandukya Karikas, II, 6) “Whatever
has no existence before and after does not exist even now.”
The meaning of both is the same. The Gita verse tells us that
a thing is not real simply because it seems to exist at some
time; because a thing that really exists is never without
existence. Gaudapada simply applies this principle and gives
55\n--- 第67页 ---\nthe result, namely that a thing which begins to appear at some
time and ceases to appear afterwards, is really non-existent
all the time.
Thus continuity of existence without change is the test
of reality. Such continuity however is only evidence of
transcendence of time and the other elements of relativity.
Reality is not in time, nor in space; nor is It related to anything
else as cause or effect. This is the strictly philosophical
definition of Reality, according to the Sages.
Transcendence of causality is very important. It implies
that changelessness is an inalienable quality of the Real. And
this is as it should be; for a thing that has undergone a real
change is no longer the same thing. The fact that a thing has
suffered a change shows that it was never real. Things that
are in time and space are subject to change, because they are
divisible into parts. Thus earth, being divisible, can be made
into a great variety of things; hence it is not real. Thus
indivisibility is also a test of reality. We shall see later how
this test is applied.
It is also axiomatic that the Real is a thing that exists in
Its own right, independently of other things. Whatever has a
dependent existence is unreal. Thus things formed out of some
material, such as earth, wood, or metal, are unreal; as
compared to the things made out of them, it may be said that
the materials are real; for this reason the sacred lore and the
Sages freely illustrate the unreality of the world by comparing
it to objects made of such materials, and the Reality — the
cause of the world — to the materials.
For example, a pot is made of earth; therefore it has no
independent existence. Such existence as it seems to have is
derived from earth. The pot therefore, says the ancient lore, is
only conventionally a pot; but really it is only earth. Before it
was made it was only earth, and after it is broken it will be
56\n--- 第68页 ---\nearth; and even now it is only earth, with the name and form of
a ‘pot’. Therefore it is earth all the time. As its appearance as
pot is transitory, we are told that the pot is unreal as pot, though
it may be real as earth; this reality as earth is only relative, not
only because earth is divisible and changeable, but also because,
being in time and space, it has no continuous existence.
In the same way the world, which is an appearance in
the Real, is only conventionally the world, having no existence
of its own, independently of the Real; therefore it is unreal as
world, being nothing but the Real all the time. But the teaching
must not be limited by the analogy, because there is this vital
difference, that the Reality never suffered a real change.
The unreality of the world should be understood by us
— so we are told by the Sage — by means of three analogies,
namely the rope mistaken for a serpent, the waste land on
which a mirage appears, and dreams. The Sage has told us
that all the three analogies are necessary and should be taken
together; for the truth we seek is transcendent and cannot be
explained adequately by means of a single analogy.*
We have seen the use of the first analogy. But when a
rope is first mistaken for a serpent, and then recognised to be
a rope, the serpent ceases to appear. That does not seem to be
the case with the world. Even when it is known that the world
is only an appearance of the real Self, the world continues to
appear. This is the objection raised by one that has heard the
teaching and been more or less convinced. The correct
explanation is that mere theoretical knowledge does not
dissolve the world-appearance, but only the actual Experience
of the Self. But this explanation may be premature at this
* It must be remembered that analogies are not proof, and no Sage thinks
that he is proving anything by means of analogies. The teachings of the
Sages are authoritative because they are Sages. Analogies are used by
them as a means of helping us to understand the teaching.
57\n--- 第69页 ---\nstage. Hence the Sage seeks to convince us that a false
appearance may continue to be seen even after it is known
that the thing is false. This is illustrated by the analogy of the
waste land on which a mirage is seen. The mirage is a false
appearance, just like the snake. But it continues to be seen
even after it is known that there is no water in the place. We
thus see that the mere fact of an appearance persisting is no
proof that it is real. But then a further doubt arises. The disciple
says, the case of the mirage is distinguishable; the water of
the mirage is conceded to be unreal, because even though it
does not cease to appear after the truth of it becomes known,
its unreality is proved by the water not being available for
quenching thirst; the world is not so, because it continues to
serve innumerable purposes. The Sage dispels this doubt by
appealing to the experience of dreams. The things that are
seen in dreams are useful; food eaten in a dream satisfies
dream-hunger. In this respect the state of waking is in no way
superior to the dream-state; the use of dream-objects seems
as valid within the dream, as the use of waking-objects seems
valid within the waking state. A man that has just eaten a full
meal goes to sleep and dreams that he is hungry, just as a
dreamer, having eaten a full dream-meal, wakes hungry. Both
are proved false in sleep. This much we have seen from the
dream-analogy, that a thing may seem to satisfy a need, and
yet may be an illusion. The fact is, the need and its satisfaction
are both equally unreal.
We thus understand that the world is not real as such,
because it does not satisfy that test of reality given by the Sages.
There are a great many religions which do not accept
this teaching, which is intended to lift the seeker of the Truth
out of the morass of ignorance from which he wants to escape.
Every one of these religions is based on a set of beliefs or
creeds, in which more or less of the ignorance that sustains
58\n--- 第70页 ---\nbondage is incorporated. For this reason the adherents of these
religions are unable to accept this teaching. They seek to refute
it. But in doing so, they are up against the standard of Reality
that has been given to us by the Sages. They seek to overcome
the difficulty in two ways. They deny the standard. All the
same they feel that it is the right one, and seek to prove that
the world is real according to that standard also. In doing so
they are still uneasy, and relieve their consciences by inventing
degrees of reality, a most unphilosophical device, condemned
by all the Sages.
It may be here noted that a concession is made to human
weakness by the Sages. The world is unreal from the point of
view of the absolute Truth, but it is as good as real so long as
ignorance retains its sway over our minds.*
Thus it happens that these believers have no real
grievance against the Sages. The teaching does not mean that
the world is not real for those that fully believe that the body
or the mind is the self — who do not feel that this is ignorance,
and do not at all want to get rid of it. The ancient lore is
twofold. One part of it is addressed to those who are not
conscious of being in ignorance, and therefore have no use
for a teaching intended to dispel that ignorance. The other
part of the ancient lore is addressed to those that are conscious
of the ignorance and are in earnest to escape from it. These
two parts are quite distinct. But this feature of the ancient
Revelation is not known to these believers. Besides they are
offended by the inevitable corollary that theirs is a lower
position; they also feel it a grievance that the world, which
they believe to be real, should be dismissed as unreal, and
often want to quarrel with us who are followers of the Sages;
* The Truth as taught by the Sages is paramarthika; the Truth as conceived
in ignorance is vyavaharika; of course the latter is untruth as viewed in
strict philosophy.
59\n--- 第71页 ---\nwe however have no quarrel with them, as the Sages have
pointed out, because we realise that for them it is all right to
believe as they do, and, so believing, to make the best of the
world while it lasts. They are like dreamers who are persuaded
that their dreams are real, and do not want to awake. We have
begun to see that this worldly life is only a dream, because
the Sages tell us so; and we want to awake.
That the world has no existence of its own is stated by
the Sage as follows: The world and the mind arise and set
together as one; but of the two the world owes its appearance
to the mind alone; That alone is real in which this (inseparable)
pair, the world and the mind, has risings and settings: that
Reality is the one infinite Consciousness, having neither rising
nor setting.*
We are thus reminded of a fact not unknown to us, but of
which the importance has till now escaped us. The world
begins to appear just when the mind comes into being, after
remaining merged and lost in sleep; it continues to appear
only so long as the mind continues to function; it disappears
with the mind when the latter is dissolved in sleep; it is seen
again only when the mind comes again into being on waking.
When the mind is lost in sleep, there is no world-appearance.
From this it follows that neither the mind nor the world is
real. This is so, not only because they do not appear
continuously, but also because they have no existence of their
own, independently of the Reality, in which their risings and
settings take place. Here also the standard of reality as defined
by the older Sages is clearly accepted and applied.
It may perhaps be contended that the world does not
appear only because there is no mind or senses to perceive it.
The answer is very simple. It is true that in sleep there is no
* Ulladu Narpadu verse 7 (see appendix A, verse 12).
60\n--- 第72页 ---\nmind; but WE are there. And if the world were real, what is
there to prevent its appearing to US? That there is no mind or
sense-organs in sleep, is no reason for the world not being
seen. The real Self does not need any medium to see whatever
is real. The sacred lore tells us that the Self is the Eye of
Consciousness†, by which alone the mind and the senses are
able to perceive; His power of being aware of reality, say all
the Vedantas, is never lost. We do not see the world in sleep,
because the world does not exist.
The Sage has also said the same thing in a different form.
“The world is not other than the body, the body is not other
than the mind; the mind is not other than the Primal
Consciousness; the Primal Consciousness is not other than
the Reality; That exists unchanging, in Peace.”*
The question may be asked how we can be sure of the
existence of the Reality, which is here said to be the Source
from which mind and world arise, and into which they set.
The answer is that this unreal pair cannot appear and disappear
without something real in which they can have their risings
and settings.
Our chief difficulty in accepting this teaching is this. We
have become accustomed to the thought that the world exists
outside of us, and that we ourselves are the body, or that we
are the mind, which is in the body. We have also assumed that
the mind is an exceedingly small thing as compared with the
world, and that makes it difficult for us to conceive how this
wide world can be in the mind, or can be one with the mind.
This difficulty is connected with another of our false
assumptions, namely that time and space are real, because
time and space are inseparable elements of the world-
† This teaching is given later on in this chapter, where it is shown that
forms are unreal.
* Guru Vachaka Kovai verse 99 (see appendix B, verse 19).
61\n--- 第73页 ---\nappearance. When the world appears, it does so with time
and space, and when it vanishes in sleep or in the Egoless
State, time and space do not remain.
The simple solution of the difficulty lies in this, that all
these assumptions are out-growths of the primary ignorance,
the ego-sense, and are therefore discredited.
Because of this notion, namely that the world is outside
of us and consists of objects perceived through our sense-
organs, the world is taken to be an objective reality, as opposed
to mere thoughts, which are admitted to be subjective, and
therefore unreal.
The Sages tell us that this objectivity is a gratuitous
assumption — that in fact the world exists only in the mind.
The Sage of Arunachala states the position thus: “The world
is nothing but the five sensations, namely sounds and the rest
of its kind; thus the world consists of the objects of the five
sense-organs, the one mind becomes aware of these five
sensations through the five senses. That being the case, how
can the world be other than the mind?”*
Here the Sage draws our attention to a fact upon which
philosophers of all grades are now agreed — thanks to the
elaborate demonstration by Immanuel Kant — namely that
what all we perceive is not the world itself, whose reality is in
question, but an ever-shifting mass of sensations, namely
sounds, contacts, forms, tastes and smells. That these
sensations are not outside — if there be any outside at all —
but only inside, that is, in the mind, is undeniable: this is freely
admitted, even by some scientists, who do not profess to be
philosophers. They are thoughts arising in the mind. Along
with these thoughts arises the thought that there is an outside
in which things exist, which are the origin of these sensations;
* Ulladu Narpadu verse 6 (see appendix A, verse 11).
62\n--- 第74页 ---\nit may be noted that an exactly similar conviction arises during
dreams also and persists in full force until the dreams come
to an end. Those that maintain the objective reality of the world
are bound to prove by unobjectionable evidence that these
sensations are really caused by objects existing outside,
because the burden of proof lies on them. The presumption is
against their case, for the reason shown by the Sages.
The world, they say, is real; they contend that it does
not become unreal simply because it does not appear to
some who are unable to see it, being asleep. They allege
that while some are asleep, others keep awake and see the
world; so the world is being seen all the time by someone
or other. They add up the waking states of all persons whom
they suppose to exist as distinct individuals, and thus make
out that there is a continuous world-appearance. And this,
they say, proves that the world is real. If a person awaking
from sleep remembers that he did not see the world during
sleep and thus doubts whether the world existed during
the time he slept, he has only to ask someone who remained
awake and learn from him that the world was seen by him
during the interval.
The evidence is inconclusive; in fact it is not evidence at
all. Let us take the case of a sleeper who on waking wants to
ascertain by unimpeachable evidence whether or not the world
continued to exist during the time he slept; let us even suppose
that this inquirer assumed that time existed when he slept, and
is therefore real. He is asked to accept the evidence of those
that did not sleep at the time. But these ‘witnesses’ are
themselves part of the world whose reality is in question; the
sleeper doubts the reality of the world because it did not appear
to him in sleep, even though the world has begun to appear
again on his waking. Does not this doubt cover these ‘witnesses’
also? He was not aware of them in his sleep, as the Sage pointed
63\n--- 第75页 ---\nout to an objector. Therefore their reality is as doubtful as the
reality of the world as a whole. How is that doubt to be dispelled?
For the awakened sleeper to admit them as witnesses, there
must be some independent evidence to prove that they are real.
No such evidence is offered. He is supposed to accept their
reality simply because he sees them; that he had seen them
before he slept does not make any difference, because the same
is the case of the world. Thus the argument is simply a subtle
way of begging the question. The presumption that the world
is unreal is not only unaffected, but strengthened. It is as near
conclusive proof as can be expected.
There is another argument for the objectivity of the world,
namely, that it appears the same to all observers. It is
questionable whether the world appears the same to all. It is
common experience that there are wide differences among
men in their views of the world. But let us suppose that there
is substantial agreement among all observers. The Sage tells
us that this argument is invalid, because it involves the false
assumption that there are different observers. He explains the
apparent ‘agreement among observers’ as being due to the
fact that there is only one observer in all of them; hence the
uniformity of the world-appearance is not due to the reality
of the world; thus the argument fails.
The truth is this. The mind itself by its own power of
self-deception creates hypothetical world corresponding to
its sensations, along with the container of the world, an
‘outside,’ — and projects it into the ‘outside’. This creation
and projection are involuntary and unconscious processes, and
hence the mind never questions the existence of an outside
and of an objective world in this outside. If the mind
consciously and deliberately created the world, it would be
able to create a much pleasanter world; it is unable to do this,
because the process of creation is not conscious. This we see
64\n--- 第76页 ---\nin dreams; there the mind creates its own dream-world; but it
is no pleasanter than this waking world; often it is worse, as
in nightmares, which are like hell.
That the mind has this power of self-deception, itself
creating a world and being deceived by it, is what we see in
actual experience. We have just now seen that this power is
the cause of dreams. The dream-world appears real while
the dream lasts; if in the dream the dreamer doubts the reality
of what he sees and tries to find out the truth, he always
concludes, not that he is dreaming, but that he is wide awake.
In fact Nature never allows any one to go on dreaming and
at the same time know that he is dreaming.
But this power can be seen at work in waking too. By its
power of abstraction, the mind can impart to whatever it
imagines a semblance of reality, by which it is itself deceived
for the time being, just as in dreams. The sense of reality varies
according to the concentration of the mind and the consequent
vividness of the mental images created. When witnessing a well-
planned and well-acted play on a stage, we are deceived into a
belief, however short-lived, that what we see is real. The same
thing happens when we are reading a novel written by a great
literary artist. In both these cases the characters and events have
no real existence. But they rouse powerful emotions in us,
because of the illusion of reality created by the artist and assisted
by our own imagination. If the illusion be feeble — as when the
skill of the artist is not up to the mark — the emotions aroused
— if any — are also feeble, and we are not deceived. It is a fact
that so far as unintentional creation is concerned, all living
beings are endowed with a higher degree of artistic skill than
any artist that has ever existed.
We think that children have a much higher degree of this
power than adults. We fail to notice the same power in ourselves,
because our mental creations are disciplined by the drill at
65\n--- 第77页 ---\nschool and in the drudgery of life into a degree of uniformity
with the creations of other minds, whose very existence is itself
a creation of mind. We are aware of this self-deception in every
case in which it comes to an end, as on waking from a dream,
on laying down a book, or on the curtain falling on a play.
When however the illusion is not lifted, naturally we are unable
to see that we are being deceived. The only way to end this
self-deception is to win the direct experience of the real Self.
There is no other way. We shall see later, when we discuss the
three states of our life in ignorance in contradistinction from
the Egoless State, that the Experience is the waking from this
dream of relativity and bondage.
The Sage has given us further proofs of the untenability
of the belief in the reality of the world as such. Distinctions
and variety are the very life and soul of the world-appearance.
All these are the progeny, says the Sage, of the primal
ignorance. Among these distinctions we find time and space.
Have we any proof that time and space are objective
realities? If there be no proof to that effect, then it will be ridiculous
to contend that the world is real as such.
Philosophers of the West from the time of Kant* have
been familiar with the theory that space, time and causality
are the mind’s creation.
Recent developments in physical science, beginning with
the theory of relativity enunciated by Einstein, make the case
stronger still. But the strongest argument against the truth of
time and space is that given to us by the Sage of Arunachala,
which we shall study in due course.
According to Einstein time and space are not two distinct
realities; there is only one thing that can be said to exist, namely
* Kant may be said to have given a logical proof of the philosophical
principle of relativity. This principle is not new; it is the starting point
of Vedantic philosophy.
66\n--- 第78页 ---\nspace-time, not two things, space and time. But this ‘space-
time’ is never directly experienced; it is just a hypothetical entity
which is assumed by physicists in order to help them to
understand — or think they understand — physical phenomena.
No layman — no one who is not a mathematical physicist —
can ever understand this ‘space-time.’ The world thus conceived
is no longer an objective reality, but an abstraction represented
by a mathematical equation.†
Thus the scientists have proved to us that time and space
are illusions arising in a thing called space-time. But this new
entity has not even the testimony of sense-experience in its favour.
We shall now see what we can learn from the Sage; he is
emphatic that neither time nor space is real. He says: Where are
time and space apart from the sense of ‘I’? If we were the same
as bodies, then it could be said that we are in time and space. But
are we bodies? We are the same at all times and in all places;
hence we are that Reality which transcends time and space.”*
Time and space are mental forms, coming into existence
subjectively after the ego-sense. In sleep there is neither time
nor space. When we awake there sprouts up the ego, saying ‘I
am the body’; it thus creates time and space and locates therein
the body and the world. When the ego sets in sleep, all these
things cease also. Therefore it is said that time and space have
no existence apart from the ego; and the ego and the mind are
practically the same. Therefore they are mental. If it be objected
that we have the experience of being bound and held in time
and space, the Sage answers that this is an illusion, due to the
† This is known as the theory of Relativity. This term, if it has any meaning,
conveys the sense that neither time nor space has any existence of its
own; each exists — or seems to exist — only in constant relation to and
association with the other. The theory corroborates the advaitic teaching
that time and space are mental.
* Ulladu Narpadu verse 16 (see appendix A, verse 21).
67\n--- 第79页 ---\nnotion ‘I am the body’; the body alone is in time and space.
What then are we? What is our true nature? The Sage tells us
that we are neither the body nor the mind, but the eternal ‘I
am’, which is unchangeable, and which runs like a thread
through the succession of thoughts; in every thought there is
this ‘I am’. ‘I am young’, ‘I am grown-up’, ‘I am old’, ‘I am a
male’, ‘I am righteous’, ‘I am the sinner’ — in all these thoughts
the ‘I am’ is the constant factor. It never changes its nature; it
only seems to do so, by the confusion of the real Self — who is
this ‘I am’ — with the body; this confusion gives rise to the
ego-sense. Time and place appear in and by this ‘I am’, but do
not affect Him. This ‘I am’ is not a thought of the mind. It is the
real Self, transcending time and space. We should reject the
varying thoughts that pass, and isolate the pure ‘I am’, which is
the Self. If we do so, says the Sage, we shall find that He is
timeless and spaceless. And since these do not survive the death
of the ego, they are unreal. We may here take this to heart:
Reality is that which exists in the Egoless State.
It is possible that some of us may be perplexed rather
than convinced by these considerations. But only the most
obtuse-minded can resist the conclusion that there is no clear
evidence to show that time and space and the world that seems
to fill them are objective realities, existing independently of
the mind that imagines them.
The following consideration may be of some help. Time
and space are always imagined to be infinite. We cannot help
imagining so. But there is no proof that they are infinite. When
we dream we find both time and space, and as our dream has a
beginning, we ought, if we are seeing reality, to be able to know,
then and there in the dream, that dream-time had a beginning.
But we are not able to do so. Only when we awake do we find
out that we were mistaken. There is no substantial difference
between dream-time and waking-time in this respect.
68\n--- 第80页 ---\nSince time does not really exist, there is no past, nor
future, nor even the present; nor can there have been
anything like a creation of the world. Also all things that
presuppose time are unreal. So we had no past births, nor
shall have any in the future; nor are we now embodied, nor
can death be real. Neither can there be actions done in the
past, whose fruits we would reap. Nor are we now doers of
action, the fruits of which would be reaped by us in future.
This is the absolute, undiluted truth, as experienced by all
the Sages; this however does not affect the relative validity
of the beliefs of the layman.
Since space is an illusion, the distinction between inside
and outside — without which the world cannot be an objective
reality — also becomes unreal. Thus all the multitudinous
limitations which have always appeared to pertain to us are
shown to be illusory.
Since there is no outside, there are not only no
inanimate objects, but also no living persons, in that
outside. We have seen already that many of the arguments
for the world’s reality took for granted the multiplicity of
persons located in space. This idea is clearly an outgrowth
of the ego-sense. The I-sense being limited to the body of
the seer, he cannot help imagining that in every body that
he sees there is a person. Thus the notions of ‘you’ and
‘he’ arise, and these are ignorance.
The Sage expresses this as follows: “When the sense of
‘I am the body’ arises, then the notions of ‘you’ and ‘he’ also
arise; but when, by the Quest of the Truth underlying the ‘I’,
the I-sense is put an end to, then the notions of ‘you’ and ‘he’
also cease; that which then shines as the Sole Remainder is
the true Self.”*
* Ulladu Narpadu verse 14 (see appendix A, verse 19).
69