\n--- 第1页 ---\nR
EFLECTIONS
ON
T S R M
ALKS WITH RI AMANA AHARSHI
By
S.S. COHEN
Books available by the same author:
Guru Ramana, Srimad Bhagavata, Forty Verses and
Advaitic Sadhana
Sri Ramanasramam
Tiruvannamalai
2006\n--- 第2页 ---\n© Sri Ramanasramam
Tiruvannamalai
First Edition 1959
Second Edition 1971
Third Edition 1979
Fourth Edition 1990
Fifth Edition 2006 — 1000 copies
CC No. 1038
ISBN: 81-88018-38-4
Price: Rs.
Published by
V.S. Ramanan
President
Sri Ramanasramam
Tiruvannamalai 606 603
Tamil Nadu
INDIA
Email: ashram@ramana-maharshi.org
Website: www.ramana-maharshi.org
Typeset at
Sri Ramanasramam
Printed by
Gnanodaya Press
Chennai 600 034\n--- 第3页 ---\nPREFACE
To write a commentary on Sri Ramana Bhagavan’s
words, which are deemed to be lucidity itself, may seem to
be a superfluous labour; yet there are thousands of studious
seekers who have not had the privilege of hearing the teach-
ing direct from the Master’s lips, who would feel benefited
and, indeed, happy to receive an exposition of it from those
who have. For the sake of these I have culled from the com-
pendious work, now the well-reputed Talks with Sri Ramana
Maharshi, such gems and in such numbers as in my humble
opinion can fairly and comprehensively represent the
teaching, adding my own reflections, as “Notes”, to each
quotation which I have named “Text”, to indicate its origin.
I have, moreover, sifted and classified them in separate
chapters so as to facilitate the study of each individual subject.
I deem it essential to give here a brief biography of the
book in question. It is named “Talks” from being a record
in the form of a diary of some of the conversations which
the visitors and disciples have had with the Master on
Spiritual matters for almost exactly four years — April 1935
to May 1939. In those years it used to be called “The
Journal”. For roughly half of this period it was written in
the Darshan Hall itself by the diarist, or recorder, Sri M.
Venkataramiah, the late Swami Ramananda Saraswati, at the
end of each particular conversation at which he was present.
Sri Bhagavan scarcely ever answered in English, but invari-
ably in Tamil, which very often the diarist himself translated
into English to the questioner within the hearing of the
whole audience. But questions in Telugu and Malayalam,\n--- 第4页 ---\niv Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Bhagavan answered in the same languages, and the answers
in the latter language may be said to have been lost to the
diarist, who did not understand Malayalam.
Therefore the language of this diary is of the recorder,
more often it is a paraphrase of the Master’s answers, occa-
sionally His very words, rendered into English, for it was
impossible to write down afterwards all He had said, or to
keep pace with Him even if the answers were to be taken
down verbatim on the spot. What we want is the Truth as
expounded by Bhagavan, and this Truth is all here, which
is all that matters.
As for the teaching of Sri Bhagavan, it has by now ac-
quired a worldwide recognition, and has attracted earnest
seekers from all the five Continents, as much for its fresh
simplicity as for its sturdy rationality, which appeal both to
the head and the heart. It can, however, be summed up in
the ancient dictum “Know thyself”, or “Seek the seeker”,
which the Master dins in one form or another in practically
every answer he gives. Find out the questioner, he insists,
and you will know the truth, which will solve all your
problems and remove all your doubts.
Peace, by whatever name and in whatever guise it goes
— happiness, knowledge, liberation, truth, etc. — is the
conscious and unconscious aim and object of all human
endeavour; for, the Master tells us, it is the very nature of
our being, our very Self, so that self-seeking in the last
analysis turns out to be a quest for Peace, from which there
is no escape. There is no feeling, no thought, no action
which does not stand on the foundation of Self. Self-
preservation, or self-love is the dominant instinct in all life.
When the Lord God commanded the Children of Israel
in the wilderness to love their neighbour as themselves
(Leviticus, XIX, 18), He meant that the maximum good\n--- 第5页 ---\nPreface v
that one man can do to another is to love him as much as
he loves himself, self-love being the strongest of all passions,
and the substratum of all emotions. We have no doubt heard
of the self-immolation of many a mother for her child in
cases of extreme danger, and of a patriot for his country,
but the gratification derived from this immolation is to the
Self. My child, my country, clearly denote the ‘I’, or Self,
and what is immolated is only the body, and not the Self,
which, being pure knowledge, pure spirit, can never be
destroyed to be immolated.
We, therefore, seek the Self in everything, in every
circumstance, and at every moment. It is self-love or self-
seeking that induces us to desire, to work, to learn, to
compete, to exert, to become politicians, administrators,
scientists, black marketeers, gamblers, philanthropists,
patriots, and finally yogis. It is self-love that makes us scour
the skies, dig the earth and plumb the oceans. But alas, this
self-seeking, being unintelligent, is sought outside the Self
and thus succeeds only precariously, if at all. To seek the
Self we have to go to the Self, not to the not-Self.
When people, therefore, group round the Master with
bundles of problems, bundles of questions and grievances,
he knows that they are seeking only the Self, and to the Self
he turns them. “You are asking all these questions in the
interest of your own self,” he virtually tells them, “all your
efforts have so far been directed for the good of this self of
yours; now try to find out whether this good has been a
genuine good, and this self is your true Self. You have been
seeking this good in the wrong direction, in wrong things
and wrong places, because you have been mistaken about
your own identity. What you have been taking for yourself
is not yourself at all. Your instinct of self-love has got mixed
up with your sense-perceptions and brought you down to\n--- 第6页 ---\nvi Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
this strait. You fell victim to a hoax, from which to be saved
you have taken the trouble to come to this Ashram with your
load of worries and misery for luggage.
“Now what you should do is to learn what the Self is,
and then directly seek it. Do not digress in irrelevant matters,
in bodies, koshas, involution and evolution, birth and death,
in supersensuous sights and sounds, etc., for all these are
glamorous irrelevancies which trap and seduce you away
from the reality of yourself and retain you in the delusion of
the senses from which you are now attempting to escape.
What is of importance is not what you perceive, think or
do, but WHAT YOU ARE.” Sense-perceptions, conceptions,
sensations, actions, are mere dreams, mere pictures in the
consciousness that perceives them. They rise from it, like
dreams from the dreamer, distract its attention for a while
and disappear in it. They change incessantly, have a begin-
ning and an end, but he, the thinker and knower, being pure
intelligence, remains ever. The knower is thus indestructible.
The light of knowledge comes only from him, the subject,
never from the object, the body. What we therefore call our
Self is not the body, which is born, grows and dies, which is
made of innumerable non-homogeneous parts which do not
think, do not seek, do not perceive and do not understand.
We are the intelligent indivisible unit ‘I’ — life itself — which
pervades and uses the body, which sees but cannot be seen,
hears but cannot be heard, smells but cannot be smelled,
knows but cannot be known: for it is always a subject, never
an object. And because we cannot see, hear or smell our ‘I’,
we mistake it for the body which can be seen, heard and
smelled. Thus the self-instinct, the ‘I’-sense, getting mixed
up with the sense perceptions, loses itself in the world of
sense-percepts, from which none can save it but the Supreme
Guide, the divine Guru.\n--- 第7页 ---\nPreface vii
Thus the knower, or dreamer, is alone real; the known
is sheer dream. This sums up the teachings of the Srutis,
and conforms to the experience of Sri Ramana Bhagavan.
To follow up the Quest till the Self is realised, is the
path of Jnana, of Supreme Knowledge, of Liberation and
Bliss everlasting — a path which has been viewed by the
Master from every side and discussed in every detail. He
has said everything that needs be said and revealed everything
that needs be revealed. And whatever he has not said and
revealed is scarcely worth knowing.
This is, therefore, the spiritual Kamadhenu,* which
can satisfy the hunger of all Truth-seekers. The sadhaka, or
yogi, who puts the teaching to the test will find in it ample
material to guide him in his inner quest. What helps one
sadhaka in his forward march may not help another; but
every sadhaka will find in it the hints which will help him
most to work out for himself the method of practice which
suits him best and which is likely to lead him straight to the
Goal. He who looks in it for long, detailed lectures on the
rules of meditation and samadhi, as he is accustomed to do
on the laws of physics and mathematics, will look in vain;
for we do not deal here with sensuous problems and equa-
tions which can be verified and resolved in the common
world of liquids and solids, of durations and dimensions,
but with the obstacles of the seeking mind itself to perceive
its own native state — obstacles which none can remove but
the very same mind through self-investigation and self-
control, without the help of any sensuous medium or scien-
tific instrument.
Vellore. S. S. C
* The Celestial Cow which grants all boons, of edibles in particular.\n--- 第9页 ---\nCONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
Preface.................................................................iii
I Happiness and Misery.........................................1
II Life, Death and Rebirth.....................................14
III Destiny and Free-Will ........................................27
IV Siddhis and Visions.............................................38
V Brahmacharya, Solitude and Social Life..............49
VI The world...........................................................55
VII God.....................................................................76
VIII Scriptures and Scholarship................................81
IX The Self or Reality.............................................88
X Heart and Mind...............................................106
XI True and False Mouna.....................................116
XII Grace................................................................122
XIII Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi..........................129
XIV The Jnani or Jivanmukta...................................180
Appendix..........................................................188
Glossary............................................................191\n--- 第10页 ---\nCHAPTER ONE
HAPPINESS AND MISERY
1. “How to avoid misery?” The Master answers: “Has misery
a shape? Misery is only an unwanted thought. The mind
is not strong enough to resist it. It can be strengthened
by worship of God.” 241*
Note: Bhagavan at the very outset drives to the heart of the
human problems, which are the consequences of man’s
delinquencies, thoughtlessness, desires, sins, etc., namely,
misery. He tries to open men’s eyes by asking, “Has misery a
shape?” Surely misery is not a solid, heavy object which can
descend on our heads and crush us. It is a purely mental
phenomenon, a mere thought, which can be driven away
with a little effort by a strong mind. But unfortunately the
minds of men are generally weakened by lack of control,
strong attachment, selfishness, and ignorance, so that they
stand always at the mercy of every calamity that comes their
way. Bhagavan suggests some methods of strengthening the
mind. The worship of God is probably one of the easiest.
The contemplation of the highest, purest, and most sublime
ideal elevates the mind, and for the time being shuts out all
other thoughts, including those that cause misery. By degrees
the mind acquires purity and balance, and so, permanent
peace, which no calamity can shake.
* The figure marked at the end of each quotation represents the
number of the section in the Talks from which it has been taken.\n--- 第11页 ---\n2 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
2. “I have no peace of mind. Something prevents it —
probably my destiny.” Bhagavan answers: “What is
destiny? There is no destiny. Surrender and all will be
well. Throw all the responsibility on God. Do not bear
the burden yourself. What can destiny do to you then?”
244
Note: The questioner is a lady — a Maharani — in great
mental distress. Bhagavan is touched. He gives the solace
that everything is borne by God, and on Him all one’s burden
should be laid through surrender. This appears to play a
tune different from the previous answer, where the worship
of God has been recommended. Here the tune is “surrender”,
which amounts practically to the same thing as worship
through contemplation. Contemplation or meditation is also
surrender; for relinquishing all thoughts but that of the
meditation is relinquishing the whole world. In fact cessation
of thinking is the greatest of all surrender. Although
meditation can be sustained for only a limited time every
day, it becomes very powerful if repeated daily for years.
By “there is no destiny” Bhagavan does not mean that
there is no prarabdha: we are all agreed that there is, but his
meaning is that once we surrender genuinely and truly,
prarabdha will pass us by unnoticed: it will work itself out
while our mind is immersed in its thought of God. After all
destiny is as insentient as the body and thus has no power
over the mind unless the mind has fallen an abject prey to
its own thoughts and emotions, like that of the common man.
3. “Siva made over all His possessions to Vishnu and went
roaming about in forests, wildernesses and graveyards,
living on begged food. He found non-possession to be
higher in the scale of happiness than possessions. The
higher happiness is freedom from anxiety — anxiety over\n--- 第12页 ---\nHappiness and Misery 3
how to protect the possessions and how to utilise them,
etc.” 225
Note: This is not to be taken as advice to us to imitate
Siva, namely, to smear ourselves with ashes, live in cremation
or burial grounds and on begged food, in order to gain
happiness; for then, cemeteries would be more full of the
living than the dead, and there would be more beggars than
begged-ofs. We have only to draw the moral that possessions
are not conducive to peace of mind, as it has been illustrated
in the last text by the case of the Maharani, who had come
in search of peace.
Moreover, we must not take this story literally. Lord
Siva is Parameswara, the Lord of Kailas, the Supreme Yogi
who Himself confers Bliss and jnana on His devotees. Where
is the necessity for Him to give up anything to gain jnana
and happiness, He the born Jnani? With or without
possessions He is Supreme Bliss itself. This surrender of His
possessions to Vishnu is a play, a piece of acting to teach us a
lesson in renunciation, which alone leads to eternal
happiness, just the reverse of accumulated wealth.
Furthermore, merely giving up possessions does not
confer happiness, if the mind continues to run amok and
creates difficulties for itself far worse than do possessions. The
mental attitude towards riches and the world has to change.
4. “If happiness is due to one’s possessions, then it should
increase and decrease proportionately to their increase
and decrease, and becomes nil if one has nothing to
possess. But is this true? Does experience bear this out?
“In deep sleep one is devoid of possessions, including
one’s own body; yet one then is supremely happy.
Everyone desires sound sleep. The conclusion is that
happiness is inherent in one’s own self and is not due to\n--- 第13页 ---\n4 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
external causes. One must realise his Self in order to open
for oneself the store of unalloyed happiness.” 3
Note: This is plain common sense. The happiness of sleep
is patent to all. We call it rest, which is another word for
comfort, for peace, notwithstanding the fact that we are
then completely denuded of all possessions, including our
body. This bliss of sleep is the most precious heritage of
life: man, animal or plant, which have no property or wealth
of any kind. It is a bliss which does not come from any
external circumstance or condition, but from within oneself
— one’s own being. This truth is open to every thoughtful
person to verify for himself, and does not require much
strain to arrive at.
5. “What is happiness? Is it inherent in the Self or in the
object, or in the contact between the subject and the
object?”
Bhagavan: “When there is contact with a desirable object
or memory thereof, and when there is freedom from
undesirable contacts, or memory thereof, we say there is
happiness. Such happiness is relative and is better called
pleasure. But we want absolute and permanent
happiness. This does not reside in objects but in the
Absolute. It is peace free from pain and pleasure — it is
a neutral state.” 28
Note: Peace, which characterises true happiness, is neither
pain nor pleasure; for both are active states, resulting from
the contact of the subject with the object, as well as from the
memory of it, which requires the going out of the subject
from himself in pursuit of the object, whereas peace is
inherent in the being of the subject himself, as we have
proved it in the illustration of sleep. This peace has no relation
whatever to the object, the not-being. To BE is peace, is bliss.\n--- 第14页 ---\nHappiness and Misery 5
Happiness is thus always present as our very self. We have
only to be — not to think or do — in order to be in eternal
bliss. For thinking is always connected with a sense-object —
the body, or other bodies, — and never with the Self. Pleasure,
being the result of this contact, must perforce be transient,
whereas bliss is of the being or Self, the changeless, fixed
subject, who is the thinker of all thoughts, the doer of all
actions, and the same at all times and in all circumstances.
6. “There is a state beyond our efforts and effortlessness.
Until it is realised, effort is necessary. (This is the state of
samadhi, which is blissful). After tasting such bliss even
once, one will repeatedly try to regain it. Having once
experienced the bliss of peace, no one would like to be
out of it, or engage himself otherwise. It is as difficult
for the Jnani to engage in thought as it is for an ajnani to
be free from thought. Any kind of activity does not affect
a jnani; his mind remains ever in eternal peace.” 141
Note: “Effort and effortlessness” are action and inaction,
beyond which stands the state of being, to realise which, efforts
of meditation, that is, sadhana is necessary. Once the bliss of
this state is tasted it can neither be forgotten nor abandoned.
In other words, once we transcend the activities of the mind
— thinking, feeling, etc. — we will always thereafter endeavour
to transcend them in order to taste again the blissful being,
till we attain permanency in the latter. Then thinking will be
as difficult to perform as it is in the beginning difficult to
suppress, with the result that we will remain ever in peace,
irrespective of what we do and do not do. This is the sahaja
samadhi state of the Jnani, which is undiluted bliss. Even his
action is considered to be inaction because it is effortless.
7. “The universe exists on account of the ‘I’-thought. If that
ends there is an end of misery also. The person who is in\n--- 第15页 ---\n6 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
sleep is also now awake. There is happiness in sleep but
misery in wakefulness. In sleep there was no ‘I’-thought,
but it is now while awake. The state of happiness in sleep
is effortless. We should therefore aim to bring about that
state even now. That requires effort.”
222
Note: Bhagavan persists in hammering in us the truth that
happiness comes only from the Self. Whenever there is the
thought of oneself — of ‘I’ — there is also a thought-world
— you, they, he, and a million other things, — and whenever
there is a world there is suffering. This may be taken as an
inflexible law. The world is therefore a state of misery, One
who is in utter misery drugs or drinks himself to sleep, so
that he may forget himself and his misery for some time in
the blessedness of sleep where there prevails freedom from
thought and, thus, from misery. After sleeping off his
suffering, the drugged person wakes up to resume it again.
Therefore in order to be perennially free from suffering we
have to perpetuate our sleep, even in the waking state, in the very
world itself. This is the aim of all yogic practices and is called
samadhi, which means sleep in the waking state, or sushupti in
jagrat, to which all efforts have to be directed.
8. The pet squirrel is waiting for an opportunity to run
out of its cage. The Master remarks: “All want to rush
out. There is no limit to going out. Happiness lies within
and not without.”
229
Note: The Master loves to indulge in analogies drawn from
everyday life, and this one is apt and beautiful. The squirrel
is the jiva, which escapes from its “home” — the Self or Heart
— to enjoy the pain and pleasure of the world of diversity,
although it means homelessness, of being a stranger abroad.\n--- 第16页 ---\nHappiness and Misery 7
“All want to rush out” applies to the vast majority of
people who prefer to be deluded by the world’s shadow-
show than remain at “home” in its peace and stillness.
The pet squirrel is a baby-squirrel, which the Ashram
has kept in a cage to protect it from the marauding cats. Baby
squirrels who accidentally fall from their nests on the trees
and remain helpless and in the lurch, would be taken up by
Bhagavan who would look after them, till they were fully grown
up and could look after themselves, when he released them.
9. “Soul, mind, ego are mere words. These are not real
entities. Consciousness is the only truth. Its nature is
Bliss. Bliss alone is — enjoyer and enjoyment both merge
in it. Pleasure consists in turning and keeping the mind
within; pain in sending it outward. There is only
pleasure. Absence of pleasure is called pain. One’s nature
is pleasure-bliss.” 244
Note: Consciousness, Self, Being are one and the same reality.
As we have already seen, the Self is blissful: we, in our nature,
are bliss, but when we “rush out”, to use the metaphor of
the last note, when we extrovert and take the body for
ourselves, giving it a special name, we become other than
ourselves — the body and its name — then we are not bliss.
We take upon ourselves the suffering which the body of Mr.
So-and-so is heir to. In other words we imagine ourselves
the not-Self and likewise imagine in ourselves the suffering
and pain of the not-Self. Extroversion is the cause of this
false imagination. Instead of looking inwardly at the pure
and blissful seer of the world, we look outwardly at the
misery and disease-laden world and at the perishable body
of the seer, which we mistake for the seer himself.
“Soul, mind, ego are mere words: consciousness is the
only truth.” This is a timely reminder that we should not\n--- 第17页 ---\n8 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
lose ourselves in sounds that convey no sense at all. Bhaga-
van is supremely practical. Nobody knows what soul or ego
is, although we repeat the words mechanically, but every-
body knows what awareness is, what consciousness and
unconsciousness mean, for we daily see before our eyes peo-
ple in an unconscious state — in sleep, swoon, or under
anaesthesia. Therefore the Master uses the word conscious-
ness for the Self and for all its synonyms — soul, spirit, mind,
knowledge, intelligence, and even ego, which is a misnomer
for the Self.
10. “Your nature is happiness. You say that this is not
apparent. See what obstructs you from your true being.
It is pointed out to you that the obstruction is the wrong
identity. Eliminate the error. The patient himself must
take the medicine to cure his illness. If, as you say, the
patient is too weak to help himself, then he must remain
quiet, giving a free hand to the doctor. That is
effortlessness.” 295
Note: The first half of this text has already been dealt
with. With reference to the patient and the medicine, the
questioner had pleaded having “placed himself
unconditionally in the hands of the doctor”. It stands to
reason that the Guru cannot see the Self on behalf of the
disciple, for he is always seeing it on his own behalf. It is the
disciple’s mental outlook that has to change and himself to
take the medicine prescribed by the Guru in order to remove
the false identification. It will not do to plead weakness and
go scot-free from the obligation of doing sadhana, for anyone
can do the same and exempt oneself from making efforts.
Bhagavan suggests that if the disciple is “too weak” to make
the effort [himself], then he must completely surrender to
the Guru. This alternative seems to please most of these\n--- 第18页 ---\nHappiness and Misery 9
“weak” seekers, because it releases them from the necessity
of straining themselves. The question now is whether this
weak disciple is strong enough to surrender. If he is unable
to make a little effort to concentrate his mind, whence will
he have the strength to make the far greater effort of
surrender, which necessitates constant remembrance? If the
questioner has abandoned himself so “unconditionally”, as
he thinks he has, he would not come to beg for Grace, but
would himself be the one to confer Grace, namely, a Guru.
In the next dialogue we shall hear Bhagavan’s own view on
this point. I am giving the whole dialogue as it is in the
original to clarify the above points.
Beginners must, however, take heart from the fact that
whatever effort they make in this line, it is never wasted:
everyone has to pass through all the stages on this path to
become adhikari, as every man has to pass through infancy,
childhood and adolescence to mature into adulthood.
11. Q. May I have Guru’s Grace?
A. Grace is always there.
Q. But I do not feel it.
A. Surrender will make one understand Grace.
Q. I have surrendered heart and soul. I am the best judge
of my heart; still I do not feel the Grace.
A. If you have surrendered the question would not have
arisen. 317
Note: That the questioner is serious as well as
determined, no one can deny. He has also “surrendered heart
and soul”, of which he is “the best judge”. Then why is Grace
keeping him in the lurch? Is Grace partial, or the Self
heartless? We have either to suspect the wisdom and goodness
of the Self, or the completeness of the surrender. And as the
former is unthinkable, the fault must lie with the latter.\n--- 第19页 ---\n10 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Bhagavan’s concluding answer that if the surrender has
taken place the request for Grace “would not have arisen”,
exposes the illusion under which most people who lay claim
to surrender, labour, notwithstanding the addition of “heart
and soul” into the bargain. Self-analysis, the most scrupulous
and honest examination of one’s motives and the secrets of
one’s heart and mind, is a very essential part of our sadhana,
auxiliary to the vichara and dhyana. It eliminates all the
delusions of the seekers. Persons are even known who
imagine that if they use a persuasive language with the Guru
they can get from him whatever they want. Self-examination
eradicates this foolishness, and sobers them to a sane outlook
about the role of the Guru in relation to the disciple.
12. “Every person seeks happiness but mistakes pain-associated
pleasure for happiness. Such happiness is transient. His
mistaken activities give him short-lived pleasure. Pain
and pleasure alternate in the world. What is it that is
not followed by pain? Man seeks it and engages in it. To
discriminate between pain-producing and pleasure-
producing matters and to confine oneself to the happiness-
producing pursuit only is vairagya (dispassion).” 302
Note: Is the end of this text a good definition of Vairagya?
Not usually in its course, but certainly in its results,
Renunciation is happiness. There exists no such thing as
happiness in the world, because the world is the not-Self,
the Self, as we have already proved it, alone being undiluted
happiness. It is a contradiction to seek a virtue or quality in
its opposite, say, love in hatred, peace in fear, light in dingy
darkness, etc. To expect happiness in an area which is hostile
to happiness, namely, the world, is a vain expectation. Yet
the activities of all men are based on this false expectation,
although they imagine themselves in possession of its\n--- 第20页 ---\nHappiness and Misery 11
fulfilment. This auto-intoxication is like the intoxication of
the opium-eater, who drugs himself to an artificial bliss. Yet
the Self incessantly asserts itself, and every now and then,
through hard knocks, matures a person to the realisation of
his deplorable state. This is the vairagi, the budding mukta,
who aims at curing himself of the habit of opium-eating.
13. “The desire for happiness is a proof of the ever-existent
happiness of the Self. Otherwise how can desire for it
arise? If headache were natural to human beings, no one
would try to get rid of it. One desires only that which is
natural to him. Happiness, being natural, it is not
acquired. Primal bliss is obscured by the not-Self, which
is non-bliss, or misery. Loss of unhappiness amounts to
gaining of happiness. When misery is eliminated the bliss
which is ever-present is said to be gained. Happiness mixed
with misery is only misery.” 619
Note: Much of this text has already been discussed. The
first line is very suggestive. That every living being desires
its own wellbeing is axiomatic; for it is an innate instinct —
inherent in life itself, which ultimately leads to the
rediscovery of oneself as eternally blissful.
If happiness is our very Self, as the text declares, how,
one may ask, do we then happen to be in this world so devoid
of it as to need taking so much pains to gain it? The answer
is that we are at no time devoid of it: it is now and has always
been present, as our very being. But, Bhagavan avers, this
“primal bliss” has been obscured by the apparently enjoyable
world which the senses have created. The external objects,
the not-Self, being very attractive, have monopolised our
attention and have lured us away from the perception of it.
Yet enjoyment mixed with misery is nothing but misery.
Eliminate the creation of the senses and the unmixed\n--- 第21页 ---\n12 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
blessedness will stand revealed. There is no need to strive
for happiness as such, but strive to do away with the artificial
delights of the world, which are misery in essence, to be in
perpetual bliss. This is the main point of the text. “Loss of
unhappiness amounts to gaining of happiness.”
The statement that “one desires only that which is
natural to him” does not mean that because one desires a
thing, that thing is proved to be one’s nature, for that would
put a different complexion on the teaching. What it means
is that if bliss is not our very existence why should we desire
it so ardently? It also means that even the common desires
we possess aim at happiness for the Self.
14. “Why should there be suffering now?”
Bhagavan: “If there were no suffering, how could the
desire to be happy arise? If that desire did not arise,
how would the quest of the Self be successful? What is
happiness? Is it a healthy and handsome body, or timely
meals and the like? Even an Emperor has endless
troubles, though he may be healthy. All suffering is due
to the false notion ‘I-am-the-body’. Getting rid of it is
jnanam.” 633
Note: There you are: pampering the body with all
possible amenities — health, the best of food and care,
wealthy leisure, good looks, and physical graces, etc. — does
not confer happiness: if anything it multiplies the difficulties
for a number of obvious reasons. Moral health alone,
irrespective of material amenities, leads to tranquillity; for it
entails a good deal of dispassion for the body. Hence the
more we reduce our attention to and clinging love for the
body, the nearer we draw to the bliss of the Self. This is a
standing refutation of the belief that the body is our Self and
an eye-opener to those who on the one hand desire peace of\n--- 第22页 ---\nHappiness and Misery 13
mind and on the other worship their body more than they
do the image of God.
Is suffering an unmitigated evil? Bhagavan answers in
the negative. It is on the contrary a blessing, in that it brings
us to our senses and compels us to think profoundly and
start a quest for liberation from suffering.
The three points which this text proves beyond doubt
therefore are: (1) the body is not the man, (2) man is sorrow-
less by nature, and (3) sorrow, being an infliction, can be
eradicated only by self-knowledge.
F\n--- 第23页 ---\nCHAPTER TWO
LIFE, DEATH, AND REBIRTH
1. News of someone’s death was brought to the Master. He
remarked: “Good. The dead are indeed happy. They
have got rid of the troublesome overgrowth — the body.
The dead man does not grieve. The survivors grieve for
him. Do men fear sleep? On the contrary they court it
and on waking up they remark that they have had a
happy sleep. Yet sleep is nothing but temporary death.
Death is a long sleep.” 64
Note: Bhagavan points out the glaring contrast in our
behaviour in the twin states of death and sleep, which are
the same except in matter of duration. Of that too we cannot
be very sure. We hate death, but run with might and main
after sleep, so much so that if we remain sleepless for a few
nights, we seek medical help and start swallowing sleeping
tablets, if not also resort to drastic morphia injections. In the
temporary death we call sleep, we spread our beds and look
forward to it, singing with the Ancient Mariner:
“O Sleep, it is a gentle thing,
Beloved from pole to pole
To Mary Queen the praise be given,
She sent the gentle sleep from heaven
That slid into my soul!”
In the long sleep we call death, instead of feeling happier
still for the departed beloved who enjoys it, we put on long\n--- 第24页 ---\nLife, Death, and Rebirth 15
faces and mourn. The irrationality of our behaviour would
appear ludicrous to the man of wisdom but for the poignancy
of the intense grief and terrifying fear which death inspires.
The Master perceives the body as a “troublesome
overgrowth” because it is superimposed on him — the pure
being. Though he has a body he sees himself bodiless —
videha. The body-’I’ sense does not exist for him, yet the
needs and diseases of the body continue to be “troublesome”.
The Videha is a Mukta, sometimes called Videhamukta.
Devotees worship him as the manifestation of the pure
Brahman, but the unintelligent call his state ‘living death’.
But then we are all working for this ‘living death’, and they
who ridicule him too.
The Master continues:
2. “If a man dies while yet alive he need not grieve over
another’s death. One’s existence is evident with or
without the body. Then why should one desire the bodily
shackles? One should find out his immortal Self and be
happy.” 64
Note: In the last note we have seen who the “man who dies
while yet alive” is. Naturally such a man does not mourn the
death of anybody; for he knows their state and condition as
he knows his own, and laughs with joy. Bhagavan speaks
from experience when he says that one remains the same
under all circumstances and conditions “with or without a
body.”
3. A great devotee of Bhagavan lost his only son — three
years old. The next day he and his bereaved family came
to the Ashram. The Master seeing them said: “Training
of mind helps one to bear sorrow and bereavement with
courage — the loss of offspring in particular. Grief exists
only so long as one believes oneself to be of a definite\n--- 第25页 ---\n16 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
form. If the form is transcended one would realise oneself
to be eternal, having neither birth nor death. That which
is born is only the body.” 80
Note: “Transcending the form” is a grand idea. What
death destroys is only the form, and so long as we attach
ourselves to the form we continue to feel the sting of death.
But if by knowledge we come to realise that the form is not
the person we love, we will be able to transcend grief and, in
fact, death itself.
We are all agreed that the beloved is not a mere shape,
a coloured picture, an inanimate substance, but a being, an
entity which teems with life and intelligence, which thinks,
feels, loves, wills, acts, and with which we establish
relationships as father, son, husband, neighbour, friend, etc.
The body, being devoid of intelligence, can, by itself, perform
none of these functions, and, when life (i.e., the man)
withdraws from it, it remains an effete matter fit for
cremation.
The “mental training”, which Bhagavan suggests, will
not only kill all sorrow at bereavements, but will also reveal
to us the truth of our immortality, and thus save us from
future birth and death. Hence the Scriptures (Srutis) lay down
the law that any perceivable and conceivable object is the
object of consciousness, and thus insentient, changeable and
destructible. The subject or consciousness alone is sentient,
changeless and indestructible.
4. “See how a tree, whose branches are cut grows again. So
long as the life-source is not affected it will grow. Similarly
the samskaras sink into the heart in death: they do not
perish. They are reborn. Just as a big banyan tree sprouts
from a tiny seed, so the wide universe with names and
forms sprouts forth from the Heart.” 108\n--- 第26页 ---\nLife, Death, and Rebirth 17
Note: This is the rationale of rebirth. The samskaras, or
impressions, left over at the close of one life become the
seeds for the next. They are stored up in the Heart, from
which a new body with new environments, new
circumstances and new tendencies “sprouts” forth at the right
time to form the new life. As the tortoise withdraws its limbs
into its shell, so do the lifelong (psychical) impressions gather
together at the last moment and, along with the senses,
withdraw into the centre of consciousness, to form the nucleus
of the future birth. The Bhagavad Gita puts this graphically:
“When the Lord acquires a body and when He
abandons it, He seizes the senses and manas and goes
with them, as the wind carries perfume from flowers.
“Enshrined in the ear, eye, touch, taste, smell, and
the mind, He enjoys the objects of sense.
“The deluded do not perceive Him when He
departs or stays or enjoys, swayed by the qualities
(gunas); the wisdom-eyed perceive Him.”
(XV. 8-10)
Thus the Lord equates the jiva with Himself, for it is He,
the immortal and changeless, who takes bodies to enjoy the
senses through them, discards them, and takes new ones, etc.
This is a scriptural confirmation of our immortality and divinity.
With the rise of the body, the senses and all the psychical
faculties also rise and spread a universe in infinite space and
infinite time. Therefore the whole universe has its roots in
the small cavity we call Heart.
5. “If a person we love dies, grief results. Shall we avoid
grief by loving all alike, or by not loving at all?”
Bhagavan: “Both amount to the same thing. When all
have become the one Self, who remains to be loved or\n--- 第27页 ---\nhated? The ego that grieves must die. That is the only
way.” 252
Note: We have already discussed the point that he who
grieves is he who takes the body for the beloved himself.
When the body dies the beloved himself is believed to have
died. Who is responsible for this error? The ego, of course,
that is, the person who mistakes himself for his own body.
But this ego is itself an erroneous conception, an imagined
entity. The conclusion is therefore clear that the whole
phenomenon is dud — the dead, the grief over the dead,
and the one who is stricken with grief over the dead. It is an
incubus created by the imagination, of which it is difficult to
rid oneself. If a way can be found to kill the incubus, say, by
a sadhana, the hallucination will disintegrate of its own accord
into the reality of the Self. In that case the love to which the
questioner refers will have no occasion to manifest, because
of the absence of duality of lover and loved, the Self being
the sole existence.
6. “You ask if it is the ego that reincarnates. Yes, but what is
reincarnation? The ego is the same but new bodies appear
and hold it. Just observe what happens even (now) to your
body. Suppose you want to go to London. You take a
conveyance to the docks, board a steamer and reach London
in a few days. What has happened? The conveyance travelled
from one part of the world to the other. The movements of
the conveyance have been superimposed on your body.
Similarly the reincarnations are superimpositions. Do you
go to the dream world, or does it come to you? Surely the
latter. The same may be said of the reincarnations. The
ego remains changeless all along.” 311
Note: The main point of this text is that what happens to the
individual rises from inside himself, though it appears to come\n--- 第28页 ---\nLife, Death, and Rebirth 19
from outside. Birth is the assuming by the individual — jiva
or ego — of a body woven from inside himself, like the dream
body which rises from the dreamer himself and superimposes
itself on his mind, or what is the same, himself. This is the
meaning of “Do you go to the dream, or does it come to you?”
Death is the temporary elimination of that superimposition,
and birth is the reestablishing of it in a new form, and so on
and on till jnana brings the superimpositions to a radical end.
This resembles the infinite number of webs which the spider
spins out of himself for his temporary use.
The analogy of travelling demonstrates the fact that the
individual himself remains always the same, and that the
long journey (samsara) is not undertaken by him but by the
number of vehicles he uses for the purpose. The jiva
constructs its own vehicles (bodies) and rides them for its
own pleasure, as it were, according to the demand of
prarabdha — the result of its behaviour and its psychical
impressions in its use of the previous bodies. It is therefore
wrong to say that we die and are reborn, or that it is we who
go round and round on the wheel of evolution. We remain
always the same without beginning or end. Let us fix that
firmly in our mind lest we lose ourselves in Darwinism,
Occultism, Behaviourism and the rest of their tribe.
7. “Do intellect and emotions survive death?”
Bhagavan: “Before considering that, first consider what
happens in your sleep. Sleep is only the interval between
two wakings. Do these survive in this interval? They
represent the body-consciousness and nothing more. If
you are the body they always hold on to you. If you are
not, then they do not affect you. The one who was in
sleep is the one who is speaking now. You were not the
body in sleep. Are you the body now? Find out this, and
the whole problem will be solved.\n--- 第29页 ---\n20 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
“That which is born must die. Whose is the birth? Were
you born? How do birth and death affect the eternal Self?
Think to whom these questions occur and you will know.”
426
Note: This is extremely interesting to those who are
interested in their own death. You are awake now, and you
will be awake tomorrow. But in between the two there is a
gap of no-waking state. What happens to your intellect and
emotions in that state? You may plead ignorance of what
happens, but you do know that you exist then, otherwise
you would not mention the gap, namely, sleep, at all: you
would not say “I slept for six hours last night,” admitting
thereby that you undergo the experience of sleep as you
undergo that of waking. If there were an interruption in
your existence at night, you would end with every day and
be a new man every morning. Then there could be no
question of your being able to remember that you met so-
and-so yesterday, or did such and such thing twenty years
ago. There would be no memory of anything previous to
this day, not even of your name, home, business or family
relationship at all, for it would be as if you had taken a new
birth. The fact that the memory of previous incidents, objects
and of having again and again slept and wakened persists,
proves your fixity, that you are a logical continuum, passing
through a variety of experiences, sometimes pleasant and
memorable, and sometimes the reverse. You are the thread
on which all these experiences string themselves, like beads.
“Granting,” you may contend, “that I exist in all these
experiences and states and in all these years, how is it that I
remember most of these experiences, but not those which
happened only a few hours ago in my sleep?” The answer is,
we are not concerned with the experiences at all; for memory,\n--- 第30页 ---\nLife, Death, and Rebirth 21
like the senses, returns to the Source in sleep and comes out
again on waking. We are concerned only with your own
existence and, as you admit its continuity in sleep, there
remains nothing for us to do but to apply this to the state of
after death. I think there should be no difficulty to do that.
Taking our stand on the continuity of the jiva even in the
absence of the body in sleep, we find that the possession of a
body need not be the criterion for existence. That being the
case, what valid evidence do we have to postulate extinction
of existence with the extinction of the body? Certainly none.
As for our intellect and emotions after death, they will
go where they are even now going every night.
Bhagavan’s remarks now become obvious: “The one who
is in sleep is now in waking. You were not the body in sleep,
so you are not it now. That which is born — the body —
must die. You are not born so that you may die. Births and
deaths do not affect you — the Self.”
8. “How were we all in our previous births? Why do we not
know our own past?”
Bhagavan: “God in His mercy has withheld this
knowledge from people. If they knew that they were
virtuous, they would grow proud; contrariwise they
would be depressed. Both are bad. It is enough that one
knows the Self.” 553
Note: The question comes from the Ashramites: it occurs in
fact to almost everyone in the spiritual line. Bhagavan rightly
thanks merciful God for causing this oblivion before rebirth,
or else the world would have been in complete chaos, and
life far more miserable than it is already under the present
conditions. Apart from the pride or humiliation, of which
Bhagavan speaks, there are thousands of events and things
which are better completely forgotten, and millions of people\n--- 第31页 ---\n22 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
who had better remain unrecognised for one’s own sake and
for the sake of the people concerned. Problems would have
arisen in such numbers and of such a nature as to make the
earth too hot for a decent man to live in. We have therefore
to say “sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof”, and offer
thanks to God Almighty for drawing a heavy curtain between
one life and another.
Yet we have all heard of some “occultists”, who claim
the power to rend the curtain and see the Past, and wonder
what good has that done? Has it given jnana to the person
whose past life is supposed to have been read, or even to the
“occultist” himself? If it does anything at all, it is to create
serious doubts of its genuineness in some minds, and an
abject, primitive faith in some others, both of which are
definitely spiritually harmful. Why, therefore, dabble in
useless preternatural matters? Bhagavan reminds us that the
only knowledge worth acquiring is that of the Self: the rest is
pure fantasy.
9. “Where is the necessity for reincarnation? The theory of
evolution is physically perfect. But for the soul further
development may be required which happens after
death.”
The Master: “Let us first see if there is incarnation before
we speak of reincarnation. Who is the man: the body or
the soul? You answer ‘both together’. But you do not
cease to exist in the absence of the body, say, in sleep.
You call sleep temporary death. Therefore life is also
temporary. If life and death are temporary, there must
be something which is not temporary: that is the Reality.
See for whom these questions arise. Unless the questioner
is found, the questions can never be set at rest.” 644
Note: Doubts about past births have been expressed by many
people, more especially by those whose scriptures do not\n--- 第32页 ---\nLife, Death, and Rebirth 23
teach reincarnation. The questioner is a Muslim who has
found complete satisfaction in the theory of evolution
without the necessity of rebirths and without deviating from
his theological beliefs, except in that man has sprung up
from the amoeba. But his questions carry in them their own
solutions, if they are but carefully thought out.
In the first instance he admits the immortality of the
soul and its continued development after death till perfection
is achieved, yet he is unable to rid himself of the bias for the
body, which he makes the partner of the soul in the synthesis
of his self, or ‘I’. On what ground does he give the body a
place in the make up of the ‘I’, he does not care to investigate.
If the body is half his self, then this is no longer a
homogeneous unit, but a hybrid compound of mortal and
immortal substances, of which the immortal, which he calls
the soul that survives death, is only a part, or half. Is this
rational? Moreover, if the soul is not an integral whole, how
is it possible for it to attain perfection in the evolution of
which he speaks? Again, how does he know that the soul
undergoes “further development” after death? What does
he, first of all, conceive the soul to be to require this
development? Confusion becomes more confounded when
he gives the body a share in his ‘I’, endowing it with sentience,
with intelligence, when a little thinking would have convinced
him to the contrary. By admitting mortality to the body, he
has at once confessed to its insentience, for sentience never
dies: it is eternal life. The body is thus insentient and
therefore unintelligent; whereas the ‘I’ is pure intelligence
as the knower of all things. Therefore the body is neither
the ‘I’ nor a part of it.
As for rebirths, why does he find them illogical? If in
this life he is born, as he admits he is, why cannot he be
reborn? That which has caused this birth should be a valid\n--- 第33页 ---\n24 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
cause for another birth. What makes him imagine that the
cause of this birth of his has exhausted itself and can no
longer be available for another birth, or a series of new births?
Let us illustrate this by a concrete example. A man
marries because he has a desire for a woman. If the woman
a little later dies, he may marry a second time, impelled by
the same urge. But suppose he also loses his body in the
meantime, what is he to do to satisfy this persistent craving?
Naturally he has to take another body, as he had taken the
present one for some desire or other.
Thus Bhagavan tells us that there is no such thing as
rebirth: what there is, is only assuming one body after another
for the satisfaction of desires. If you do not want to take
another body, by all means you are at liberty not to, provided
you have ceased to crave for anything, thereby eliminating
the cause of “rebirth”.
We have therefore to study man before we enquire about
evolution, reincarnation, life, death, etc., which is what makes
the Master advise the questioner to discover himself first.
Bhagavan continues:
10. “One sees an edifice in his dream. Then he begins to
think how it has been built brick by brick by so many
labourers and during so long a time. So also with the
theory of evolution. Because he finds himself a man he
thinks that he has evolved from the primal state of the
amoeba.” 614
Note: This makes our sciences dream sciences. So they are.
It is a well-known fact that scientists do not concern
themselves with the absolute reality, which they leave to the
philosophers to do, and remain satisfied with the physical
reality, for example, the splitting and multiplication of the\n--- 第34页 ---\nLife, Death, and Rebirth 25
chromosomes, the proportional combination of the hydrogen
and oxygen atoms to form the water molecule, etc. And when
they step out of the physical into a non-physical area they
get confused and confounded. When biologists, for example,
speak of the evolution of life, they really mean the evolution
of the form which the life inhabits, as we see before our eyes
the evolution of the human body from the pinhead zygote
to the size of the newborn babe, to that of childhood,
adolescence, and full adulthood, and the gradual unfoldment
of the mind in it. Scientists do not have direct contact with
life to know what life is, whether it evolves or remains
changeless. They cannot, for instance, directly perceive the
life in the chromosome but can only infer it from the
behaviour of the chromosome, whose physical qualities they
can directly observe: size, colour, shape, movements, changes,
constituents, etc.
Therefore those who believe in the laws of evolution
must understand that their knowledge is very partial, and
pertains only to the insentient universe, which alone can be
perceived and can suffer changes.
As life is a closed book to the scientists, so also is life’s
other name — mind. Not their activities, but life and mind
as they are in themselves, as substances, as ‘First Principles’.
If they knew the nature of the mind, they would have also
known that all their endeavours were limited to a world
which is essentially a dream, taking place inside their own
consciousness. For at no moment can the scientist step out
of his mind and say ‘here is a real world which can stand by
itself without me — without my mind’. When one is in a
dream and is asked to step out of it to realise that it is a
dream, one can shake oneself a bit and be out of the dream
to the waking state to verify his old position. But in the
waking dream — jagrat — it is not so easy, because the senses\n--- 第35页 ---\n26 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
are then all out, fully entrenched in this their own dominion,
of which they are the absolute monarchs. This is the reason
why the scientist refuses to believe himself dreaming, and
continues to imagine that he had crawled out of the amoeba
into the monkey some millions of years ago, and out of the
monkey some scores of thousands of centuries ago. How
are we to convince him of his error that it is not he who has
undergone all these metamorphoses, but the shapes of the
bodies he has assumed? If he could be convinced of this
truth, he would presumably be also convinced that the
amoeba, the monkey, and the millions of years are parts of
the evolution of this, his jagrat dream.
F\n--- 第36页 ---\nCHAPTER THREE
DESTINY AND FREE WILL
1. “Can destiny (karma) ever come to an end?”
Bhagavan: “Karmas carry in themselves the seeds of their
own destruction.” 11
Note: Karma is the destiny created for oneself by one’s free
actions. In actions are included thoughts and sensations,
motives, good or bad emotions, etc. While working out an
old destiny one is bound to create a new one by the manner
in which one reacts to its operation. Here then comes the
place of free-will. We are not free to alter the trend of an old
karma, for example, in the choice of our parents, country,
the circumstances of our birth and environments; of our
physical and mental fitness and abilities. These are forced
on us: we cannot change them. What we can change is the
manner in which we receive and work them out. We are all
agreed that there are many things in which the decision lies
in our hands: the decision is ours, the action is ours, the
motive behind the action is ours, the mental attitude with
which we do the action is ours too. This then is the field in
which we are allowed freedom of will, and it contains the
seeds of our future destiny. We can shape that destiny as we
will, and if, like most people, we are not aware of this truth,
we allow ourselves to be carried away by our impulses and
eventually land in worse trouble than we are in already. Most
often the new karma does not follow on the heel of the one\n--- 第37页 ---\n28 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
which is being worked out now, so that we drag the chain of
our slavery through several lives.
Here the salutary precepts of the Scriptures come to
our rescue to make us rectify our views on life and our attitude
towards others. These and the persistent knocks of destiny
gradually soften our impulses, modify our outlooks, sharpen
our intellect, and slowly but surely turn us into seekers; then
into yogis; and finally into full-fledged Jnanis, when karma
ceases. Jnana totally annihilates it. Let us not forget that all
these improved changes or evolution — take place not in
the man himself, but in the faculties which are superimposed
on him, that is, in his views and actions.
Jnana is thus brought about by a good karma, generated
by a good free-will, which is the result of persistent suffering
from a bad karma, generated by a bad free-will. Karma is
like an inanimate machine, which yields up what you put
into it. That is why the Master begins his Upadesa Saram with
the statement that karma is jada, insentient, unintelligent.
What makes it move and act as stern destiny is the energy
generated by the exercise of our free will.
It may be asked that if a persistently bad free-will
caused by the embitterment resulting from a persistently
bad karma brings about a worse karma, which drags us
down and down, where is the chance of our ever coming
up to the surface again? We must not forget the saving
Grace of suffering and the inherent purity of our nature,
which will not permit us to remain forever insensible to
degradation and misery: we cannot forever remain sunk in
bottomless ignorance and never attempt to climb up to
freedom. Suffering and the intense urge to return to
ourselves act as floats and buoy us up from the depths of
this vast ocean of samsara. Thus the action of karma through
suffering gives the impetus to jnana which destroys karma.\n--- 第38页 ---\nDestiny and Free Will 29
This is what Bhagavan means by “karma carries in itself
the seeds of its own destruction.”
It goes without saying that karma takes effect only in a
physical body; for a debt incurred in a physical body has to
be paid also in such a body, either in this very body or in a
future one. The Vedanta does not believe in an after-death
payment; hence rebirth is necessary.
2. “Even without any initial desires there are some strange
experiences for us. Wherefrom do they arise?”
Bhagavan: “The desires may not be there now. But they
were once there. Though forgotten they are now bearing
fruit. That is how the Jnani is said to have prarabdha. Of
course this is so from the point of view of others who
observe the Jnani.” 115
Note: The questioner seems to think that people are always
conscious of their moral delinquencies, of their sins of omission
and commission, of the effect of their actions upon others, as
well as of their own desires. They are not: excessive greed
and lack of consideration for the feeling and interest of others,
are, unfortunately, a common malady, as witness politics,
competition in business, and a hundred-and-one other
deliberate and otherwise daily lapses in their conduct towards
their neighbours. So to play the injured innocent for the
troubles they get, cannot cheat Providence. Unconsciousness
or oblivion of old desires, old sins and actions which affected
oneself and others in this life or in previous lives, does not
cancel the poetic justice that is necessary to restore the
disturbed balance. Even the Jnani brings his destiny from
another life, but this works itself out without creating for him
a new karma, or a new birth, or causing him anguish, as do
the same troubles to others. His mind, having totally sunk in
the Self, has become, under all circumstances, as fresh and\n--- 第39页 ---\n30 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
cool as summer moonlight. Others, seeing the suffering of his
body, imagine the Jnani himself to be suffering.
3. “As long as you feel yourself the doer of action so long
you are bound to enjoy its fruits. But if you find out
whose karma it is, you will see that you are not the doer.
Then you will be free. This requires the Grace of God,
for which you should pray to Him and meditate on
Him.” 115
Note: Desires lie at the root of destiny. We desire and move
to acquire its object. Then we never think of the identity of
the actor, our whole attention being centred on the object
till we secure it. The question of doership in the light of
truth and untruth does not occur to us at the moment.
Enjoyment of the object preoccupies us most, enjoyment
which we tacitly accept as the reward for our action, for our
endeavour to gain it. This is karma done with a sense of
doership, the doer being the empirical ‘I’, even if the sense
is not actively in the mind: it is implied in the act itself, and
thus binds us.
Now, if we investigate into the cause and motive of the
action and into the nature of the actor, we will find that he
who has acted with the motive of enjoyment is not the real
‘I’, but an imitator, a false ‘I’, then we shall be automatically
released from the responsibility of the action, and thus from
the bondage of karma. Although we henceforth act, the sense
that it is we who are acting drops from us, and with it also
drops the power of karma to grip us; for the empirical ‘I’
will no longer be there to be gripped.
But this discovery or realisation, does not come without
the help of God, or Self, Bhagavan asserts, through intense
worship and meditation. We shall hear more of this in the
following Chapters.\n--- 第40页 ---\nDestiny and Free Will 31
Bhagavan continues the explanation:
4. “Action without motive does not bind. Even a Jnani acts
and there can be no action without effort and without
sankalpas — motives. Therefore there are sankalpas for
everyone. But these are of two kinds, the binding
(bandha-hetu) and the liberating (mukti-hetu). The former
must be given up and the latter cultivated.” 115
Note: Here is a way out of the karmic stream. Bhagavan
postulates action for all men, and results for all action, yet
repudiates the binding residue of action to apply equally to
all actors. Action binds only to the extent that its motive
element is of the binding type, the bandha-hetu, and never if
it is of the liberating type, where the material, selfish motive,
is totally absent. Therefore, those who wish to jump out of
the stream of bondage into that of liberation have to curb
their binding sankalpas and cultivate those of mukti.
The question may now be asked — How are they to
distinguish between the two, which is admittedly difficult
to do? This text is mainly meant for the sadhaka, who
constantly worries whether a certain action of his is consistent
with his sadhana or not. Bhagavan dissipates this doubt by
admitting action to all men, and a motivated action too.
For example, in olden days Bhagavan himself used to work
in the kitchen, and even once built a mud wall to his cave
on the hill. He knew then why he did that work, and
certainly aimed at the utility element in it, or else he would
not have done it. But when Bhagavan worked he was all
along aware of his true being as the doer of the action,
which is desireless. The motive of this action is thus not of
the binding type. Therefore the sadhaka’s action should not
worry him, so long as it is not of the binding type, having
desires in the background.\n--- 第41页 ---\n32 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
5. “Free-will and destiny are ever existent. Destiny is the
result of past action; it concerns the body. Let the body
act as may suit it: why are you concerned with it? Why
do you pay attention to it? Free-will and destiny last as
long as the body lasts. But jnana transcends them both.”
193
Note: “Free-will and destiny are ever existent” is a significant
statement which belies those who attribute to Bhagavan
himself the self-contradictory theory that no free will exists,
but only karma which predetermines every action and every
experience through which we pass, even the most trifling.
It goes without saying that karma cannot exist without free-
will. It is only free action which attracts rewards or
punishments, i.e. karma, so that free-will and karma rise
and fall together. That karma concerns the body and that
we should therefore let the body act as it chooses, requires
some explanation.
Karma and free-will are, like the body, insentient, and
can affect only the body, and never the intelligent being
who operates it and who transcends them both. Therefore,
so long as the body-‘I’ sense prevails, they continue to
function and the jiva continues to take one body after
another for the working out of karma; but as soon as jnana
dawns they cease to bear fruit. Karma will end with the last
body (of the Jnani) and free-will will no longer be the will
of the jiva (which usually decides on the body-’I’ basis) but
that of Brahman into which the jiva has now completely
merged.
Therefore, Bhagavan advises the seeker to pay no
attention to the working of karma on the uphadhis, but to
dissociate himself from them, when he will be free from the
obligation of taking new bodies, and consequently from
bondage.\n--- 第42页 ---\nDestiny and Free Will 33
6. “So long as there is individuality, one is the enjoyer and
doer. But if it is lost, the Divine Will prevails and guides
the course of events.
“Free-will is implied in the scriptural injunctions to be
good. It implies overcoming fate through wisdom. The
fire of wisdom consumes all actions and wisdom is
acquired through sat sanga — the company of sages and
its mental atmosphere.” 209
Note: All the Scriptures recommend good action, admitting
by implication the freedom of the will; for if the will is not
free, where is the point of asking us to be good? Man would
then be like a machine or an animal which is not responsible
for its action and thus cannot be punished. The fire of wisdom
here means the power of discrimination which the company
of the wise stimulates. Discrimination between good and evil,
of necessity induces us to choose the good and shun the evil,
the ultimate results of which will be the cessation of doership
— not the action itself, but the sense of our being its doers,
which implies the merging of the individual will in the Divine
Will, as of the individuality itself in the Divine.
Thenceforward “the Divine Will will guide the course of
action.”
7. “When prarabdha karma gets exhausted, the ego
completely dissolves without leaving any trace behind.
This is final Liberation. Until then the ego continues to
rise up in its pure form even in the Jivanmukta. I still
doubt the statement of maximum duration of twenty-
one days.” 286
Note: This is an answer to a statement supposed to have
been made by a great saint of the last century that, according
to the questioner, “Nirvikalpa samadhi cannot last longer than
twenty-one days” or death results. This, on the very face of\n--- 第43页 ---\n34 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
it, is inadmissible. What the Sage probably had in mind and,
as it often happens, wrongly reported, was the ceaseless stay
in samadhi with total unconsciousness to the world for
twenty-one days, for it might have been considered
impossible for the body to last longer without nourishment.
Even this cannot be right. Total unconsciousness to the world
never takes place in the true samadhi (See XIII, 48), for it
would cease to be samadhi and would become sushupti (deep
sleep). What lasts for long durations and is mistaken for
nirvikalpa is a simulation of it, a sort of a cataleptic trance
called laya, resembling the profoundest sleep and swoon,
where total unconsciousness of the Self as well as of the
world takes place, contrary to the experience of nirvikalpa,
where the Self as Pure Consciousness reigns supreme and
alone. This cataleptic state can be brought about by the
practice of kevala kumbhaka.* We hear of coma-like trances
of long durations, which have nothing to do with the true
nirvikalpa. The same also happens to some beginners who
let themselves go in meditation and unwittingly slip into laya,
which they either mistake for samadhi or remain baffled, not
knowing what to make of it.
Moreover, if this statement of twenty-one days were
true, there would have remained no one to teach the truth.
All the Rishis of the Upanishads and all the great muktas of
whom we have heard, would have been in their graves before
anyone had heard of them, and before they had time to
instruct anybody. Besides, there would have been nothing
for them to instruct — the experience being one of deep
sleep, if total unconsciousness to the world is the meaning of
the statement. Even the Vedas would not have seen the light
of day.
* Vide Appendix\n--- 第44页 ---\nDestiny and Free Will 35
Bhagavan avers that the body falls out only after the
exhaustion of its karma, and not before. We also know that
in many cases it lasted forty, fifty, or even more years after
the attainment of sahaja nirvikalpa. Bhagavan’s own case is a
shining example of it. He entered videhamukti, the final
disembodied Liberation, after having remained for fifty-four
years in unremitting nirvikalpa. Till then, Bhagavan tells us,
the ego continues to pop up, even for the jivanmukta, but in
its purest form, that is, without causing the Jnani ignorance
of the reality and the suffering consequent on this ignorance.
What it may cause him is a temporary, superficial belief in
the reality of the world due to the intense impact of the
senses, hence it is called ego, though pure.
8. “It is not enough that one thinks of God while doing
karma (service, or worship), but one must continually
and unceasingly think of Him. Only then will the mind
become pure.”
Bhagavan’s attendant then remarked: “Is it then not
enough that I serve Bhagavan physically, but must also
remember him constantly?” To which Bhagavan remarked:
“‘I-am-the-body’ idea must vanish through vichara.” 337
Note: The attendant is right in interpreting Bhagavan’s
remark. Seeing the Master physically comes nowhere before
the contemplation of him with the mind. Yet service to him
has its great utility, in that the very close proximity to his
person has tremendous potentialities for the purification of
the attendant’s vasanas, due to the utter purity of the Master’s
mind. But that is not sufficient to give mukti. Purificatory
processes are only a stage on the path, to make one fall in
the line of mental practices — dhyana and vichara, — which
alone can prepare the mind to experience Brahman in the
last stages of the long journey. “‘I-am-the-body’ idea must\n--- 第45页 ---\n36 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
vanish through vichara,” Bhagavan asserts.
The path of service is the path of surrender, which is
not limited to time and space; for it is round the clock and
round the equinoxes process. It goes on for years of
remembrance — a mental process again — of God, Guru or
Self.
9. “Your idea of will-power is success insured, whereas will-
power should be understood as the strength of mind
which meets success and failure with equanimity. It is
not synonymous with certain success. Why should one’s
attempts be always attended with success? Success
develops arrogance and one’s spiritual progress is thereby
arrested. Failures on the other hand are beneficial,
inasmuch as they open one’s eyes to one’s limitations
and prepare him to surrender himself. Therefore one
should try to gain equipoise of mind under all
circumstances. That is will-power. Again success and
failure are the results of prarabdha and not of will-power.
One man may be doing only good and yet prove a failure.
Another may do otherwise and yet be uniformly
successful. This does not mean that the will-power is
absent in one and present in the other.” 423
Note: The context is the case of a man, who, because of
repeated reverses in business, has lost confidence in himself,
and who is now trying to find a way of recovering it. He is
confusing confidence with will-power. One may have
abundant confidence in oneself, yet the will to work is lacking.
The case of the questioner is the reverse of this, namely, he
has the will to work, but is pessimistic about the results of his
labour, on account of persistent failures in the past. Bhagavan
advises him to develop an equal attitude to both success and
failure, which after all depend on one’s destiny, at the same
time he praises failure as more spiritually fruitful in the long\n--- 第46页 ---\nDestiny and Free Will 37
run than success, in that it kills arrogance and promotes an
attitude of vairagya, which hastens one’s approach to the
supreme goal. Most people live in abysmal ignorance of their
glorious destiny; more so of their weak points — of their
tamasic and rajasic cravings and behaviour. The rich in
particular take the strongest objection to these being pointed
out to them in a direct manner. How, then, can God open
their eyes and save them from this self-intoxication? He gives
them disasters and calamities to shake their airy castles and
crack the thick crusts of their arrogance. Pride of wealth, of
position, fame, power, learning and, worst of all, of lineage
eventually destroys itself, crushing down over the head of its
owner to his everlasting good.
F\n--- 第47页 ---\nCHAPTER FOUR
SIDDHIS AND VISIONS
1. “Is not making oneself invisible (like Vasishta and
Valmiki) evidence of advanced Wisdom (jnana)?”
Bhagavan: “No; for in that case all those who have spent
their lives in the sight of others would be considered
ajnanis. It might have been the prarabdha of these sages
to develop these powers (siddhis) side by side with their
jnana. Why should you aim at that which is not essential,
but on the contrary is apt to prove a hindrance to jnana?
Does the sage feel oppressed by the visibility of his body?
A magician can render himself invisible in a trice. Is he
a Jnani for that? Visibility and invisibility imply a seer.
Who is that seer? Find him out first. Other matters are
unimportant.” 30
Note: What counts most is jnana — the knowledge of Truth.
This is called Realisation of the Absolute, or Realisation of
the Self. The siddhis are not the Self itself, but its powers, as
are seeing, smelling, thinking, etc., with the sole exception
that the latter are common experiences, whereas the siddhis
are not. The powers themselves are unintelligent: the
intelligent is their possessor. To fix the attention on the powers
and not on their owner, who is the reality, is, therefore, like
throwing away the pearl and retaining its shell.
Again, as the common perception is a hindrance to
jnana, so are the siddhis, only more so, because the latter are
apt to slacken one’s efforts towards the Highest, and make\n--- 第48页 ---\nSiddhis and Visions 39
him fall prey to the wealth and fame which follow them like
their shadow. Therefore siddhis are far more dangerous in
the pursuit of Brahman than the senses. They are condoned
only if they are accompanied by jnana, as is the case with
Valmiki, Vasishta, and others. They have no spiritual value
whatever in other cases, and their use cannot but be highly
detrimental to him who uses them and him — the weak-
minded — who is taken in by them.
2. “The disappearance from sight by yogis like Vasishta
and Viswamitra concerns only physical matter. Is that
our chief interest? Are you not the Self — the Reality?
Why trouble yourself about extraneous matters? Take
the essence and reject other theories as useless. Those
who imagine physical invisibility counts in the quest for
mukti are mistaken. No such thing is necessary. You are
not the body: what does it then matter if it disappears
in one way or another? There is no great merit in such
phenomena. Achievement of the Real alone matters. The
loss of the ego is the main object, and not the loss of the
body. Identity of the (real) Self with the (unreal) body is
the real bondage.” 31
Note: Sadhana, that is, search for the Absolute, consists of
mental and spiritual purification through certain yogic
practices. But siddhis have reference only to the body, to make
it appear and disappear at will; to make it hear things in a
manner not usually heard, or see things in a manner not
usually seen, or smell things in a manner not usually smelt,
and so on. In other words, siddhis take one in a diametrically
opposite direction from that which the keen yogi should take.
We reject the ways and habits of the body in order to have
our attention fixed on the soul, which uses the body and
which is the one, eternal reality, whose attainment completely
redeems us from the bondage of the flesh and from sorrow\n--- 第49页 ---\n40 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
and ignorance. Siddhis, as it has been demonstrated in the
last note, perpetuate avidya, often degrade and strengthen
the ego, which we are out to destroy. Consider the
tremendous popularity and deification of the ‘clairvoyant’
and ‘clairaudient’, and the power he wields over the
superstitious, the credulous, the feeble-minded, who would
by far run after this siddhi-exhibitor rather than after the
man of truth who has attained complete union with God,
and who is in a position to show the direct way to this truth
and its bliss. We have also to consider the very frequent
possibility that the siddhis not being of the genuine brand.
Bhagavan calls them “extraneous matters”, totally
irrelevant to the true seeking — “there is no merit in such
phenomena.” The true siddhas are the Jnanis, who do not
preach siddhis, and scarcely ever exhibit them. On the
contrary, they teach nothing but the science of the Absolute
and the way to It. They have nothing to do with koshas,
creation, life-after-death, mental and astral planes, fairies,
ghosts and the like. The reality cannot be intuited with all
this lumber filling every corner of the head. Fairy tales, if
taken seriously, bar the way to the reality of Brahman;
certainly, real adhikaris do not indulge in them.
Bhagavan continues:
3. “Leave off false notions and perceive intuitively the Real.
That alone matters. If you melt a gold ornament what
matters how it is melted, whole or in parts, or of what
shape the ornament had been? You are only interested
in the gold. Realise the Self.” 31
Note: When we buy gold we do not question what shape it
had before it was melted, and how it was melted, etc. Similarly
we should not waste our time on how we are born and how
we die, how many spheres and planets we had visited, if we\n--- 第50页 ---\nSiddhis and Visions 41
did visit at all, and who we were in our past lives. All this is
dross, superfluous curiosities, “false notions,” which we have
to “leave off”. What we want is the gold, namely, to know and
be ourselves. If this is gained the riddle of the universe is solved.
The universe of the “clairvoyant” is romantic even if the
clairvoyance is genuine. What it sees is as false as dreams, as
false as this waking state, which we aim at transcending rather
than preoccupy ourselves with. The dreamer is alone real —
the dream total hallucination. The seer is the gold, the seen
the dross. The Self of the seeker is the reality, and to this Self
we should direct our whole attention.
4. “With Self-realisation real and incessant tapas results. With
the maturing of such tapas some Jnanis can make their
bodies intangible and invisible. These are known as
siddhas.” 57
Note: This is very important to note. Tapas does not mean
here the austerities that precede Realisation, but the
inherence in the Self after Realisation. Ramana Gita says in
this connection: “He who is fixed in sahaja state is in automatic
and incessant tapas.” (XI, 18) Again: “The pristine nature of
the Self is effortless, spontaneous tapas. Incessant tapas of
this kind leads to the manifestation of all powers.” (XI, 24)
This immediately draws a clear line between a siddha Rishi
and a “clairvoyant”, a magician, or a miracle-worker whom
we sometimes meet in this country and who have no jnana,
as it is shown by the display of their trade far and wide and
by their superficial teaching, if they have any.
5. “People look to the body only and want siddhis. They are
not content with the idea of jnana and so want siddhis to be
associated with it. They are likely to ignore the supreme
happiness of jnana and aspire for siddhis. For this they are\n--- 第51页 ---\n42 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
going through the by-lanes instead of the royal path,
and so are likely to lose their way. In order to guide
them aright and keep them on the royal road alone,
siddhis are said to accompany jnana. In fact jnana
comprises all, and a Jnani will not waste a thought on
them. Seekers must try to get jnana and then seek siddhis
if they so desire.” 57
Note: The main purport of this text has already been discussed
in this chapter. The people who are attracted to siddhis are
the ones who have a great attachment to their bodies, for
whose sake they seek siddhis, ignoring the real blessedness of
jnana. These people are their own enemies. The statement
that siddhis accompany jnana to “guide them aright and keep
them on the royal road” is noteworthy. The exhibition of
siddhis is permissible only on the condition that it brings the
straying sheep back to the fold — the “royal road” of jnana
or Truth. There is nothing more unpleasant to the
Enlightened man than the sight of people being led away
from the right path by exhibitionism, by a glamorous display
of the “miraculous”. To the siddhi-‘fans’ Bhagavan gives a
way to gain true and sound siddhis, namely, by first trying to
acquire jnana and then work for siddhis, if they will continue
to long for them. Then they will have a healthy appraisal of
siddhis and their use.
6. “In Halasya Mahima there is a chapter on the eightfold
siddhis. There Siva says that His bhaktas never waste a
thought on them. Again Siva says that He never grants
boons. The desires of the devotees are fulfilled according
to their prarabdha only. When Ishwara Himself says so,
what of others? In order to display siddhi there must be
others to recognise it, which means that there is no
jnana in the person who displays siddhis. Therefore these
are not worthy of any thought. Jnana alone must be
aimed at.” 57\n--- 第52页 ---\nSiddhis and Visions 43
Note: This evidence of Siva against siddhis must be taken
very seriously. For here He is in His highest Form, as the
Supreme Yogi, the Spirit and Soul of the universe, which is
Pure Consciousness and Bliss. The Tantrikas, the Kaulas in
particular, aim at siddhis, which they mistake for the highest
spiritual achievement, and their Master and Giver of siddhis
and of all boons is this very Siva with His consort Devi, also
called Bhairavi. The jnana-seeker takes the former Siva as
his ideal and guide; hence His repudiation of siddhis and
boons in Halasya Mahima is of great significance to him.
The other noteworthy point refers to boons being
granted only on the basis of merits, that is, according to the
individual prarabdhas: they are not fortuitous, as they are
commonly mistaken to be.
The third point deserves close attention. What
Bhagavan means by the display of siddhis requiring the
presence of others to witness them, which automatically
brands the displayer as ajnani, is that the Jnani is ever in the
Self, cognising nothing but the pure Consciousness which
alone exists — one without a second. To exhibit siddhis implies
the admission of multiplicity, which jnana negates. The
deliberate displayer of siddhis thus stands a self-confessed
ajnani,* the Jnani-siddha mentioned before is excepted.
7. “Atma alone is to be realised. Its realisation holds all else
in its compass: shakti, chakras, ganapati, siddhis, etc. These
are included in it. Those who speak of these have not
realised the Atman.” 57
* “O Lord of Munis, only he who has no atmajnana and is not
liberated seeks siddhis. The liberated One never follows avidya.
Siddhis can never help the attainment of the seat of Paramatma.”
(Varaha Upanishad).\n--- 第53页 ---\n44 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Note: This affirms the previous texts. Bhagavan, being
concerned only with the Absolute takes his stand on the
following truth: all things, all powers, all phenomena have a
common source which must be changeless and eternal. This
absolute Source goes in the Scriptures by various names, of
which the best is Atman or Self, which is easy for everyone to
comprehend, being represented by one’s own existence, or
being, which everyone loves and is aware of. Therefore the
Self is the repository of all powers, all shapes, all colours, all
thoughts, all sensations — the whole universe, physical,
emotional and mental, in brief. The knowledge of the Self is
consequently alone true knowledge, true enlightenment,
because it is perennial and all-inclusive. These its mani-
festations or emanations are unstable and thus cravings for
them lead to ignorance and misery. Those who deal with
siddhis, chakras, shakti, psychic phenomena and the like,
Bhagavan says, have proved themselves to have not beheld
the light of Truth, and should thus be shunned. Let us note
this very carefully.
8. “A Swiss lady, while sitting before Bhagavan with her eyes
wide open, saw the Master’s face becoming cherub-like
and draped in glorious flowers. She was drawn in love
towards that childlike face. She described the vision to
Bhagavan. He remarked: ‘The vision is in your own mind.
P. B. saw me as a giant, you saw me as a child. Both are
visions. Do not be deceived by them. P. B. had his eyes
closed, whereas you had your eyes open. Probably you
had been thinking of a child, and it came in your vision.’
The lady confessed that she had, namely, the childlike
face of Siva.” 304
Note: “Do not be deceived by visions” is a scriptural
injunction. The extent of unreliability of visions can be
gauged by the discrepancy between the vision of P. B. which\n--- 第54页 ---\nSiddhis and Visions 45
recorded a giant figure and that of the lady which recorded
a mere child for the one and the same person. All visions are
psychosomatic, mostly emanating from the subconscious, as
this lady has confessed to a prior thought of the childlike
Siva. They need not all be as obviously known to the subject
himself or herself as this vision, or its origin, has been known
to the lady in question. Some subjects do expect and look
forward to visions, and so they have them. They cook up
their visions inside themselves and then see them with closed
or open eyes, outside them. God has been the greatest victim
of such hallucinations. He who is changeless, formless and
only one, and the same for all nations, has been made to
appear differently to different people, which has cost many
million innocent lives and has brought incalculable suffering
to many more living millions. The Greeks saw Him as Zeus,
the thunder-wielder, Jesus conceived Him as a Father, and
His followers later expanded Him to “Three-Persons-in-One-
God”. To Moses He appeared as “I-am-that-I-am”, which
Bhagavan often quotes. To the Hindus He is Rama, Krishna,
and many others. Yet He is the One and only Being who
resides in all hearts. Ajnana cannot be better demonstrated
than in the intolerance and bigotry, which conventional
religions have exhibited in the recorded history of man. This
shows the danger of taking visions and symbols for truths
and acting on them.
Bhagavan continues:
9. “Visions are not external. They appear only internally.
If external they would assert themselves without there
being a seer. In that case what is the warrant for their
existence? The seer only.” 305
Note: Is the vision independent of the seer? We know that it
is not. Then how can it be real? The reality must be self-\n--- 第55页 ---\n46 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
sufficient, substantive, wholly depending upon itself, and
must be present at all times. But visions are not only
temporary, but also depend on the qualities and abilities of
the mind of their seer. Therefore all visions are false.
10. “Many visitors here tell me that they get visions or thought-
current from you. I am here for the last month and a half
and still I have not the slightest experience of any kind. Is
it because I am unworthy of your Grace? If so, I feel it
disgraceful that I, being of the lineage of Vasishta, should
not have your Grace, while far off foreigners should have
it. Will you kindly suggest what expiation I should suffer
or undergo to remove this disgrace?”
Bhagavan: “Visions and thought-currents are obtained
according to the state of the mind, which depends on
the individuals themselves and not upon the Universal
Presence. Moreover, they are immaterial. What matters
is peace of mind.” 317
Note: I have recorded here this item, not so much for the
Master’s answer, which has been substantially recorded earlier,
as for the quality of the question. This illustrates my previous
statement that visions often come to those who expect them.
This questioner has been expecting a vision since six or seven
weeks, and its absence has made him miserable, because he
is suspecting his own spiritual worth — he, a direct
descendant of the great Vasishta Muni. To be ignored in
favour of “foreigners” who are of no lineage worth speaking
of, of no caste whatever, is a disgrace to him, an extremely
puzzling calamity.
One feels for the poor man’s grievance indeed. But is
this a genuine grievance? He does not seem to heed the
persistent teaching of the Master, made in his very presence,
that visions are rubbishy stuff, and that not lineage but
adhikara alone counts in this path. I have brought this out as\n--- 第56页 ---\nSiddhis and Visions
a specimen of the mental outlooks of the worshippers of
siddhis and the harm these do in perverting the mind. Had
this gentleman extended his experience a little longer in the
Ashram, he would have found men who had lived there not
for six weeks but for six, ten and fifteen years and yet had
had no visions of any kind, and had not felt thereby any
slight to their lineage, their personal dignity, or spiritual
advancement, but who, on the contrary, considered their
absence a perfect grace from the Master, amply proved to
them in other ways.
The peace of mind of which Bhagavan speaks is
naturally contingent on the direct apprehension of the Reality.
That peace, and not visions, must be our objective.
11. “It is said of some saints that they revived the dead. Yet
even they did not revive all the dead. If that were possible
there would be no death, no cemeteries, no world, etc.”
342
Note: The context is as follows. A mother had brought the
body of her dead child about three hundred miles by train
to Tiruvannamalai, on which she had paid a very high fare,
basing herself on a dream in which she had been told that
Bhagavan’s touch would revive the child. The corpse was
not permitted to be brought inside the Ashram, so that the
touch was not granted. But to satisfy the disconsolate,
bereaved mother Bhagavan substituted the touch by an oral
statement that, if the dream were true, her son would revive
on the next day. Thereupon the body was kept for the night
and cremated the next day.
Now was that not a cruel dream? But this is the fate of
those who shape their lives on dreams, visions, prophesies,
ethereal sounds and sights, etc. In all probability this dream
had originated from a wishful thinking of the mother.\n--- 第57页 ---\n48 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Bhagavan rightly remarks that even those who were
said to have revived the dead were of limited powers, their
action being against the course of nature. Otherwise humanity
would have attained immortality, but would have thereby
created such complications — economic, political, domestic,
social — for itself that dead-revivers would have been at a
discount, if not also restrained by the law.
Revivals by the touch or the grace of saints must be
taken to depend on the prarabdha of the revived person, as
the evidence of Lord Siva given in text 6 above proves.
F\n--- 第58页 ---\nCHAPTER FIVE
BRAHMACHARYA, SOLITUDE AND
SOCIAL LIFE
1. “Brahmacharya is ‘being in Brahman’ (or ‘living in
Brahman’). It has no connection with celibacy, as it is
commonly understood. A real Brahmachari, that is, one
who lives in Brahman, finds bliss in Brahman, which is
the Self. Why should he then look for other sources of
happiness? In fact emergence from the Self is the cause
of all misery.” 17
Note: To be oneself is the most blissful state. That is
Brahmacharya, or ‘living in Brahman’. How then can he who
has been so fortunate as to enjoy that bliss seek the much
lesser pleasures of the world, which, apart from their being
doubtful, depend upon others to confer or withhold? The
inference therefore is that celibacy is granted in a Jnani, who
is ever in the brimful bliss of the Self. Yet this inference will
be wrong if it is taken as a general rule that Jnanis are always
celibates; for some of the most famous Jnanis are known to
have married one, or more than one wife and have had
children, some with possessions and some without. A Jnani
is a liberated person: liberated also from all rules and
regulations; from all codes of ethical, religious and social
conduct — he is a law unto himself, and there is no knowing
what he does and does not do. Yet he is known to lead a
sattvic life, having divested himself of all the rajasic and tamasic
tendencies even before the attainment of jnana.\n--- 第59页 ---\n50 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Celibacy as a help to sadhana is in this Advaitic line
doubtful. A married life is, from this point of view alone,
certainly no bar to the highest: it may even be of more help
in certain cases, in what the Tantras call the ‘vira’ or ‘heroic’
sadhaka. In cases where celibacy does not create definite
mental and emotional disturbances which mar the peaceful
sadhana, then certainly it is of great help, inasmuch as it rids
one of the preoccupations, duties, and anxieties which a family
life drags in its wake. And to make this point clear Bhagavan
continues the explanation:
2. “Celibacy is certainly an aid to realisation among so many
other aids.” 17
Note: “Among so many other aids” must not escape us: It is
the main point in this text. It gives celibacy a negligible value
on a par with so many other helpful factors. This is
confirmed by the next answer.
3. “Is not then celibacy indispensable? Can a married man
realise the Self?”
Bhagavan: “Certainly, it (Realisation) is a matter of fitness
of mind. Married or unmarried one can realise the Self,
because the Self is here and now.” 17
Note: The Self is All: the married as well as the unmarried.
Being one’s own self, who can be debarred from
experiencing it in its utter purity, if the mind has been
prepared for it? If celibacy is the only cause of eligibility,
then all celibates should be muktas and all grihastas in abysmal
bondage, which experience and tradition refute.
4. “How does a grihasta fare in the scheme of Moksha?”
Bhagavan: “Why do you think yourself to be a grihasta?
If you go out as a sannyasi, the thought that you are a\n--- 第60页 ---\nBrahmacharya, Solitude and Social Life 51
sannyasi will haunt you. You will be only substituting one
thought by another. The mental obstacles are always there.
They even increase in new surroundings. There is no help
in the change of environment. The mind is the obstacle.
Therefore why change the environment?”
54
Note: The real enemy, therefore, of the sadhana is not so much
a domestic life as the habits, the restlessness, the pet notions,
the desires, the stubbornness, the dullness — the immaturity,
in brief — of the mind which keeps us company wherever
we go. Why blame it on the family, or sometimes even on
God Himself?
Bhagavan rubs it in:
5. “The environment never abandons you, according to your
desire. Look at me. I left home. Look at yourselves. You
have come here leaving the home environment. What do
you find here? Is this different from what you left?” 54
Note: “Look at me: I left home”, Bhagavan says, forgetting
for a moment that what he found in the pitch-like dinginess
of Pathalalinga (underground cave) in the Big Temple at
Tiruvannamalai, to which he had escaped from home in
1896, was entirely different from his home “environment”
in Madurai. To strike a personal note of my own, I would
add that seeing Bhagavan all day long, and seeing a grasping
landlord as an incubus of a neighbour elsewhere, an incubus
which certainly was not “according to my conscious desire”,
makes a Himalayan difference. But we understand what the
Master means. One carries one’s environment with him,
which is not other than one’s own mind, as we discussed in
the last note. No one can leave his mind behind and go out
in search of God. The mind is thus the most troublesome as
well as the most helpful instrument, depending on the use\n--- 第61页 ---\n52 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
we make of it, an instrument which keeps us constant
company. It makes the environments.
By “the environment never abandons you, according
to your desire”, Bhagavan wishes to impress upon us again
the relentlessness of the mental sankalpas — our own whims
and fancies, — which shape our circumstances. We thus
prepare our bed and we sleep on it.
6. “Even if one is immersed in nirvikalpa samadhi for years
together, when he emerges from it, he will find himself in
the environment which he is bound to have. That is the
reason why Sankaracharya emphasised sahaja samadhi in
preference to nirvikalpa samadhi in his excellent work
Vivekachudamani. One should be in spontaneous samadhi,
that is, in his pristine state, in any environment.” 54
Note: Bhagavan continues the topic, but includes in the mind
the physical environment, which, for the Jnani affects only
the physical body. Even the Jnani, Bhagavan elsewhere asserts,
has to be subject to the karma of the body — his mind being
no longer tarnishable. The Jnani is ever in samadhi. When he
switches off the world, he is in nirvikalpa (better call it kevala
nirvikalpa, because sahaja is also called nirvikalpa. Vide chapter
on samadhi); when he switches it on, he is in sahaja, that is,
perceiving the physical world at the same time as being in the
reality, The physical environment of the Jnani is chalked out
for his body by prarabdha, and this sticks to him as long as he
is in the body. But of whatever sort it may be, it cannot affect
his mind which is ever centred in the “pristine state”,
irrespective of what the physical environments are.
7. “Solitude is in the mind. One may be in the thick of the
world and maintain serenity of mind: such a one is in
solitude. Another may be in a forest, but still unable to
control his mind. He cannot be said to be in solitude. A\n--- 第62页 ---\nBrahmacharya, Solitude and Social Life 53
man attached to desire cannot get solitude wherever he
may be. A detached man is always in solitude.” 20
Note: We have already observed that the state of the mind is
the true environment. But the remark of the Master about
the relation of desires to solitude can be summed up as:
“Desire is the crowd, and desirelessness solitude.” Or, “Desire
creates the city and desirelessness the forest.” Bhagavan
develops this point:
8. “Work performed with attachment is a shackle, whereas
performed with detachment does not affect the doer.
The latter is in solitude even while working. As for
service, Realisation of the Self is the greatest service that
can be rendered to humanity. Therefore the saints are
helpful although they dwell in forests. But it should not
be forgotten that solitude is not obtained in forests only,
but even in towns, in the thick of worldly occupations.
The help is imperceptible, but it is still there. A saint
helps the whole humanity unknown to it.” 20
Note: This should give the quietus to the criticism that yogis,
or seekers of the path of Liberation, are selfish. The critics
will now see their short-sightedness in attaching great
importance to physical service, which on no account can give
permanent and all-round satisfaction. Laws of Economics
and Social Reform may work well on the physical plane, may
increase the earning capacity of the labourer, give him a
better shelter, educate his children, and raise him to a higher
social status. But it can never give him happiness. We see it
before our eyes that the more you raise wages, the greater
will be the struggle of the labourer to gain more — he never
knows where to stop his demands. But even if you make
him a millionaire, his mind will remain an indigent
proletariat, like the fuzzy and ever-agitated minds of all the\n--- 第63页 ---\n54 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
millionaires under the sun. Therefore all this talk of working
for, and uplifting the poor is intrinsically based on false values.
Poor is he who is unhappy, even if his wealth were that of
Croesus. The greatest wealth is the peace which flows from
true knowledge, which can be imparted only by these
“selfish” yogis and Rishis. This does not mean that
philanthropists and social workers should close shop and
cease helping. It is their dharma to help, which they cannot
shirk, for in the performance of this dharma lies their own
salvation. But they must stop sneering at the one who alone
can give the most valuable help of all, namely, redemption
from ignorance and misery — and for ever.
The questioner remarked: “In Europe it is not
understood by the people that in solitude one can be helpful,
imagining that working in the world alone can be useful.”
Bhagavan: “Never mind Europe and America. Where are
they but in your mind? Realise yourself and all will be realised.
If you dream and wake up and recall the men of your dream,
will you try to ascertain if these men are also awake?”
F\n--- 第64页 ---\nCHAPTER SIX
THE WORLD
1. “If you make your outlook that of wisdom, you will find
the world to be God. Without knowing Brahman, how
will you find His all-pervasiveness?” 1
Note: This ‘outlook of wisdom’ is that of the Jnani who
has realised Brahman which he finds to be the source of all
perception, that is, of the world. Brahman is not only the
source of the world, but also its pervader, nay, its very self
— its warps and woofs, its very stuff and texture. But this
all-pervasiveness of God cannot be perceived till the real-
isation of the Self has been fully achieved in Sahaja Samadhi.
To tell the unrealised person that the world is God is like
writing it on water — meaningless. Ask him first to realise
God, or Brahman, and he will cease to puzzle, but will try
to understand.
2. “The world is not external. The impressions cannot have
an outer origin, because the world can be cognised only
by consciousness.” 53
Note: What is the world? Bhagavan answers, “impressions
in the mind.” Do impressions have a source? Modern
psychology answers, “Yes, the external stimuli,” which
Bhagavan repudiates. The psychologists have no proofs at
all of a non-psychical stimulus located in outer space. Yogic
experience has shown that there exists no such thing as outer\n--- 第65页 ---\n56 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
object or space, for if it were, it would not be known at all:
what is not mental cannot impress the mind. Therefore
impressions rise from the consciousness itself, like the dream
impressions which rise from the dreamer’s mind and are
perceived by it. The world cannot stand by itself, but has to
depend upon consciousness to be known, or else how can
we be sure that it exists at all (See X, 10)? If for, example, in
the midst of the dream we are to be challenged to prove that
the world we then perceive and the food we then eat were
only figments of our imagination, we would be in as much a
dilemma to prove it as we would should such a challenge be
thrown at us in the waking state about the jagrat world and
jagrat food; for, while in dream we take the dream to be real,
much as we take the waking to be real while in it.
3. “Can the world exist without its percipient? Which is
prior to the other? The Being-consciousness, or the
rising-consciousness. The Being-consciousness is always
there, eternal and pure. The rising-consciousness rises
forth and disappears. It is transient.” 53
Note: Bhagavan follows the line of argument of the previous
text that the thinker, whom he calls the Being-consciousness,
must precede his thoughts, — the world, — which he calls
the rising-consciousness. The thinker must be in existence
before he starts thinking. The thinker is one and fixed,
whereas his thoughts are countless and ceaselessly change.
Thus, the Being-consciousness is the “eternal and pure”
Reality and the source of the rising-consciousness, which is
transient.
4. “The world is the result of your mind. Know your mind,
then see the world. You will realise that it is not different
from the Self.” 53\n--- 第66页 ---\nThe World 57
Note: This sums up the previous texts. The mind projects
the world. In order, therefore, to know what the world is by
nature, the mind must be looked into. This investigation
will ultimately lead to the discovery of the identity of the
mind with the Self. So, “see the seer,” or “know the knower”
is the master-key which opens the grand secret of the Self
and the source of the world.
5. “Is the world perceived after Self-realisation?”
Bhagavan: “What does it matter if the world is perceived
or not? The ajnani sees the Jnani active and is confounded.
The world is perceived by both; but their outlooks differ.
Take the cinema, for instance. Pictures move on the
screen. Let the pictures disappear. What remains? The
screen alone. So also here. Even when the world appears
find out to whom it appears. Hold the substratum of
the ‘I’. When the substratum is held what does it matter
if the world appears or disappears?” 65
Note: One sympathises with the questioner: his curiosity is a
common weakness. In the beginning of this answer the
Master wishes to draw attention to he fact that to the Jnani
there is neither gain by seeing the world, nor loss by not
seeing it. What matters most is the Being, which is the man
himself — as he is in himself — self-sufficient and perfect,
and in this Being the Jnani is firmly established. It thus
matters very little if he perceives the extraneous world or
not.
To speculate about the mental state of the Jnani is an
idle labour, for it is anybody’s guess, like the state of the
Supreme Brahman; for both are one and the same,
notwithstanding the appearance of activity on the part of
the Jnani. This activity is, truly speaking, inactivity, like the
movements of pictures on the screen, which in reality do not\n--- 第67页 ---\n58 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
exist. There is no activity whatever on the screen, but only
an appearance of it. As the screen is alone real and the
pictures unreal, so is the Self alone real, and not the action.
Activity and the world in which it takes place are thus both
unreal. The ‘I’ is the screen, the sentient seer, and all pictures
and worlds are the insentient shows playing in, or upon it.
Bhagavan asserts that when you are confused by the
sights, turn your attention upon yourself, their seer. Continue
doing that again and again and you can bet on your assured
success.
6. “How to turn the mind away from the world, you say?
Is there a world apart from the Self? Does the world say
that it exists. It is you who say that there is a world.
Find out the Self who says it.” 81
Note: The substance of this answer is the same as that
of the preceding ones, but it differs from them in form. In
all fundamental principles we discover unity in the substance
but diversity in the presentation, which is the superficial
form. Differences in the questions impose differences in the
answers, and differences in the spiritual quests are
responsible for all the scriptures in the world. Otherwise
even the voluminous Vedas could be summed up in one
syllable — OM.
Thinking is the world: it creates the world. We think and
our thoughts appear as the external objects. That the world
had been before we were born and continues to be after we
are dead, and that science and history bear evidence to this
fact, does not alter the truth that even these scientific and
historical facts are our present thoughts or notions — notions
which haunt us as long as we are in jagrat. All the worlds and
the billions of ages which they have lasted, tumble down like
a pack of cards the moment we lay our heads on the pillow\n--- 第68页 ---\nThe World 59
and sail off from jagrat, and with them come down the history
of the people who preceded us and the world which preceded
the people, etc. Yet, notwithstanding the total pralaya of our
jagrat thoughts, the complete blotting out of the universe —
in our beds — we continue to BE, to travel to new lands and
cross new seas, though lands and seas are, like jagrat, our
own creation. So the dreamer of jagrat is alone real — the
jagrat dream a total fake.
7. “You say that the world is materialistic. Whether it is
materialistic or spiritual, it is according to your outlook.
Make your outlook right. The Creator knows how to take
care of His creation.” 240
Note: The last sentence makes us think of the politician,
social worker, philanthropist, economic philosopher, and
even the clergyman who are ever anxious to help the nation
and the world, perpetually thinking of how to save humanity
from misery and disaster. Bhagavan practically tells them
that there is a power which is making and moving all things:
Who are you to imagine that you can make and unmake to
your liking? Such worries denote ignorance of Providence,
or the arrogation to oneself the duties of Providence. These
preoccupations should be abandoned by the seekers, who
are expected to begin with a strong faith in the omniscience
and omnipotence of the Supreme Being Whom they are
seeking. Service of others is only permitted if it is done as a
sadhana with jnana as the ultimate aim, as a means to self-
purification. Find truth and all will be well with the world:
“make your outlook right, for the world is according to
your outlook”.
8. “Does Bhagavan believe in evolution?”
Bhagavan: “Evolution must be from one state to another.\n--- 第69页 ---\n60 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
When differences are not admitted, how can evolution
arise? You say that when Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that
after several births the seeker gains knowledge and thus
knows “Me”, denotes evolution. But you must not forget
that the Gita begins with “Neither I was, nor you, nor
these chiefs, etc.”; “neither it is born, nor does it die,
etc.” So there is no birth, no death, no present as you
look at it. Reality was, is, and will always be. It is
changeless.” 264
Note: The questioner is a Theosophist, and, like Arjuna and
Darwin, sees the evolution of forms and mistakes it for the
evolution of life, which is changeless. When Sri Krishna saw
that Arjuna was unable to grasp His meaning about the
absoluteness of the subject, which is neither born nor dies,
He turns a leaf and starts speaking a language which Arjuna
understands. What moves, changes and progresses is the form
which the life inhabits, or its ideas, concepts, outlooks, which
are its functions, and not itself as the thinker or conceiver. We
have all observed how man daily changes his views about
things and the world, from infancy to old age, though himself
remains the same jiva. Life is changeless and ever perfect, so
that it has no need to progress, to “evolve”. Life is pure
sentience, i.e., eternal existence, which is bound by no frontiers
to need breaking its chains through “evolution”. It is the usual
human astigmatism, rather failure in precision of language
that ascribes progress to life and brings in evolution and
reincarnation. The Srutis also speak of rebirths, but they know
what they are talking about, as does Sri Krishna in the Gita.
They say this to the millions of Arjunas of all ages, but speak a
different language to the dedicated sadhaka who has prepared
himself to receive the truth absolute.
9. “What should we do to ameliorate the condition of the
world?”\n--- 第70页 ---\nThe World 61
Bhagavan: “If you are free from pain, there will be no
pain anywhere. The trouble is due to your seeing the
world externally and also thinking that it has pain. But
both the pain and the world are within you. If you look
within there will be no pain.” 272
Note: Here again the world is sitting on our shoulders: its
misery is weighing heavily on us: “What should we do to
ameliorate it?” Is this true altruism? Is the life of the man
who worries free from the blemishes of selfishness? If not,
we know the exact value of such altruism. But this is not
really the concern of Bhagavan, who approaches the question
from the absolute level. You look outside, he tells us, and see
a world, and then you start worrying over its suffering. But
is the world really there that you should take its suffering so
seriously? The whole drama is enacted by, and inside your
mind. You are like the thief dressed as a policeman going in
search of the thief. The whole show of sympathy and concern
for the world is a show put up by the criminal who is
responsible for the world and its suffering. The thinking
mind creates the world and its suffering, and the thinking
mind now poses as the saviour of the world. Bhagavan
virtually asks it not to be a hypocrite: Root out your own sins
and you will see no sins anywhere.
10. “Is there a spiritual hierarchy of all the original pro-
pounders of religions watching the spiritual welfare of
humanity?”
Bhagavan: “There may or may not be. It is only a surmise at
best. Atma is pratyaksha (self-evident). Know it and be done
with speculation. One may accept such a hierarchy; another
may not. But no one can gainsay the Self.” 274
Note: I have underlined “It is only a surmise”, which
should be taken as an authoritative statement from the\n--- 第71页 ---\n62 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Master that no one can have the means of knowing definitely
whether such a hierarchy exists or not. This must not be
forgotten, so that all such claims may be taken at their face
value.
But even if such a hierarchy exists, can it help us to
attain the reality? Yet “watching the spiritual welfare of
humanity” sounds very attractive. But the question is,
suppose this is true, how does somebody’s watching from
some unknown area in some distant, unknown world over,
say, my spiritual welfare, help me to attain the reality — a
process which should be undergone by myself alone, inside
my own consciousness, through the immediate guidance and
presence of a Master, who has himself attained it, and has
become the reality personified, and who is far more competent
for this job than any invisible, remote “watcher”? It all
appears mist and fog to the seeker who is too practical and
too rational to hug shadows, “speculative” hypotheses. The
path is too simple to admit dubious complications. The truth
is self-evident (pratyaksha), says the Master. It does not consist
in discovering hierarchies, but in discovering the mind, or
the being, which discovers hierarchies and everything that
is known. And as everybody is a being, it follows that every
man is himself the truth and the container of all things, a
fact which cannot be “gainsaid”. “Know Thyself” remains
the wisest and the most practical counsel.
Bhagavan continues:
11. “Anyway there is nothing apart from the Self. Even the
“spiritual hierarchy” cannot exist apart from the Self. It
is only in the Self and remains as the Self. Realisation of
the Self is the one goal of all.” 274
Note: This clinches the matter: even this hierarchy is,
if it does exist, included in that one absolute Self. Then why\n--- 第72页 ---\nThe World 63
not seek the Self alone right now? Why waste your time on
secondary, irrelevant matters, which will lead nowhere?
12. “A phenomenon cannot be a reality simply because it
serves a purpose. Dreams also serve dream purposes; for
example, the dream water quenches dream thirst. The
dream creation is however contradicted in the waking
state. What is not continuous cannot be real. The real is
ever real, and not real once and unreal at other times.
The same is with magic, which appears real yet it is
illusory. Similarly the world is not real apart from the
reality which underlies it.” 315
Note: This is an answer to some Tantrikas who hold that the
world is not an illusion like a mirage, because it serves a purpose
which the mirage does not. Bhagavan refutes the argument of
utility as a criterion of reality, on the analogy of dream-objects
which have their utility in the dream world, e.g., dream fire
cooks dream food, and dream food satisfies dream hunger,
and so on, yet they do not exist. The test of reality is not utility
but perennial continuity, which places the phenomena of this
world — of jagrat — on a par with those of dreams, being as
ephemeral and, therefore, as illusory as them, whereas Reality
is the fixed substratum on which the phenomena appear. The
dream’s substratum is the dreamer himself. The jagrat dreamer
is the substratum of the jagrat phenomena. He is real but not
the phenomena; and as the dreamer of dreams and of jagrat
are the one and the same jiva, the jiva is therefore the Absolute
Brahman, which once again validates the identification of the
jiva with Brahman by the Srutis: “jive Brahmaiva na parah” (there
is no difference between the jiva and Brahman).
The next text graphically illustrates this point.
13. “There is fire on the screen in a cinema show: does it
burn the screen? There is a cascade of water: does it wet\n--- 第73页 ---\n64 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
the screen? There are tools: do they damage the screen?
Fire and water are only phenomena on the screen of
Brahman and do not affect it.” 316
Note: This is a practical and perfect illustration of Sri
Krishna’s words in the Bhagavad Gita that fire does not burn
it (the Self), nor does water wet it, nor can swords cut it, of
which no one can plead ignorance; for there is scarcely an
intelligent person who has not witnessed it in a picture-house,
and has not known that the piece of cloth — the screen —
which receives the fury of fire, water and swords remains
completely unaffected by the celluloid conflagration that
appears to rage on it. The screen is the seeing mind, the
subject spoken of in the last note, and the celluloid
conflagration is the world.
14. “Why should individuals remain caught in the affairs of
this world and reap trouble in the result? Should they
not be free? If they are in the spiritual world they will
have greater freedom.” The Master answered: “The world
is only spiritual. Because you identify yourself with the
physical body you speak of this world as physical and
the other world as spiritual. Whereas that which is, is
only spiritual. If you realise yourself as the spirit, you
will see that this world is only spiritual.” 328
Note: If pure consciousness alone is, the phenomena
that are seen and endured by it are utterly superfluous. But
because we take them seriously, we say that the affairs of the
world are troublesome. What is more serious is that we take
the body to be even more real than the phenomena, because
the body adheres to us throughout life as an inseparable
companion, from which we have no relief. We are never
given a chance in the waking state to see ourselves by
ourselves without the body, so that we may distinguish\n--- 第74页 ---\nThe World 65
between the real us and the unreal body. This ceaseless
companionship through which we perceive, act, obtain and
enjoy the objects of our desires, has created the illusion that
the body is our very Self. And in that illusion lie all our
difficulties. Because the body is physical, we think that we
are physical; because the body is diseased and tired, we think
that we are diseased and tired, and so on. But when the
Master draws our attention to our error, we take measures
to correct it — from seeing the outer world, including the
body, we turn back upon our own selves as the knowers of
the world and the body; for knowledge is not physical: it
does not have shape, smell or colour; it cannot be bound by
time or limited by space, as does the body. We will thus realise
ourselves to be the infinite Consciousness which uses the
body, when the suffering of the body will cease to affect us,
and we likewise will cease to see the world and the body as
external, but as phenomena inside our own Self. From being
physical the world will turn out to be consciousness or
spiritual in essence. The conscious separation of the body
from the pure consciousness, as a first step, will thus resolve
all doubts and is the aim and object of this sadhana.
15. A Spanish lady writes in a letter: “If the individual self
merges in the universal Self, how can we pray to God for
the uplift of humanity?”
Bhagavan comments: “They pray to God and finish with,
‘Thy will be done.’ If His will be done why do they pray
at all? It is true that the Divine will prevails at all times
and under all circumstances. The individuals cannot act
of their own accord. Recognise the force of the Divine
will and keep quiet. Each one is looked after by God.
He has created all. You are among 2,000 millions. When
He looks after so many will He omit you?
“Again there is no need to let Him know your needs. He
knows them Himself and will look after them.” 594\n--- 第75页 ---\n66 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Note: The recorder adds that “the question seems to be
common among the thinkers of the West.” So it is! for the
simple reason that the Westerners are taught from infancy
to pray for others, not forgetting, of course, to begin with
themselves, their fathers and mothers, sisters and brothers.
At the same time they are taught to have absolute faith in
the Lord. They find no inconsistency in having this absolute
faith side by side with ordering Him to execute what they
wish Him to, as if He knows nothing about it. They forget
the Sermon on the Mount which enjoins them, like this text,
“Be not ye, like unto them (the heathens who make long
petitional prayers): for your father knoweth what things ye
have need of, before ye ask him” (Matthew VI, 8).
Sometimes they even involve God in international
squabbles and invoke His help on both sides of the fighting
line. They coerce Him through mass religious processions
and open-air prayers.
Rational faith is a great unifying force in the spiritual
world, but blind faith is most disastrous all around, as the
lurid history of the Dark ages has evidenced. Blind faith is
still going strong in this 20th century, but, mercifully, with
all its fangs blunted.
Followers of Sri Ramana remain consistent and hold
on to the rational Advaitic path. God is our very Self, and so
long as we do not realise Him as such, we continue to bear
this belief firmly in us, which we reinforce by the conviction
that no man is ever neglected. God, Who is infinite wisdom,
knows what is best for each and does it without our reminding
Him. He does not need our suggestions or advice.
Bhagavan continues:
16. “Still more, why do you pray? Does not your Creator and
Protector know that you are weak? You say God helps\n--- 第76页 ---\nThe World 67
those who help themselves. Certainly, help yourself and
that is itself according to God’s will. Every action is
prompted by Him only. As for prayers for others it looks
so unselfish on the surface of it. But analyse the feeling
and you will detect selfishness there also. You desire
others’ happiness so that you may be happy. Or you
want the credit for having interceded on others’ behalf.
God does not require intermediaries. Mind your business
and all will be well.” 594
Note: Bhagavan’s accusation of the intercessor of selfishness
is fully justified. We have only to read religious history to
realise the havoc this intercession played in the political,
social, domestic and spiritual life of the West. Intercessions
and certificates of intercessions under the name of indul-
gences were bought and sold in the open market for some
centuries in Europe, and the practice, at least the notion of
intercession, still, even today, lingers among a vast section
of humanity, so that we should not wonder at people who
want to pray for others and for the peace of the world and
pose as heroes in the eyes of God and men. Even in India
the imported notion has spread to some spiritual institu-
tions, where intercession is being practised on a large scale.
Bhagavan reminds us that “God does not require interme-
diaries.”
That “every action is prompted by God” requires some
explanation. On the face of it, it looks as if this statement
negates karma and free-will. In fact it does not. What it means
is simply this: since the Self or God is pure intelligence, that
is, alone intelligent, and since no action is done without an
intelligent actor, it follows that the Self Itself is the doer (or
prompter) of all actions, notwithstanding these being bound
by the laws of karma, which are themselves the work of the
same Self. Thus God is the all-doer and all-knower.\n--- 第77页 ---\n68 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
The Self alone is intelligent existence, and because it is
not perceived as such, there is all this wrong thinking, this
false belief about the impotence, sinfulness and ignorance of
man, which need confessions, intercession of saints, prayer
for forgiveness and for peace, and what not. Bhagavan shows
us the right way and asks us to mind our own business and
go on practising till we realise the truth about God and about
humanity by our own efforts and direct experience.
17. “Does not God work His will through some chosen
person?”
Bhagavan: “God is in all and works through all. But His
presence is better recognised in purified minds. The pure
one reflects God’s actions more clearly than the impure
mind. Therefore people say that they are the chosen ones.
But the chosen man does not himself say so. If he thinks
that he is the intermediary, then it is clear that he retains
his individuality and that there is no complete
surrender.” 594
Note: That God is alone the doer we have already discussed
the point. The new point brought in here is to the effect that
only a pure mind can understand Him as such, and such a
mind does not pose as intercessor. He who so poses, as
certainly many people do, should be branded as victim to
egoistic delusions.
But the questioner seems to mean differently from the
implications of deliberate intercession. He seems to refer to
an act of Divine Grace for the benefit of someone or other,
or of a whole nation, through a human agency. This is quite
valid. But Bhagavan’s point is that such an agency is possible
in a mind which is fitter than another for this particular
work. Yet this ‘chosen’ person would not know, still less say,
that he is chosen without contradicting his mission, for the\n--- 第78页 ---\nThe World 69
simple reason that the choice is an automatic act, and appears
to the person himself as natural as any other act, though it
turns out to be for the benefit of mankind.
If we grant that all actions are God’s then there is
nothing to distinguish one act from another, all actions being
induced or inspired by the intelligent actor from inside
himself without the reminder that it is God’s. The same may
be said of the universally or individually beneficial act. Thus
he who poses as an intercessor, a conscious intermediary,
must be looked at with suspicion, more so if he lays claims to
higher spirituality through the tapas of surrender. This proves
that his surrender is very defective and his tapas not worth
the name.
18. “Are not the Brahmins considered to be the priests or
intermediaries between God and others?”
Bhagavan: “Yes, but who is a Brahmin? A Brahmin is
one who has realised Brahman. Such an one has no sense
of individuality in him. He cannot think that he acts as
an intermediary.” 594
Note: This definition of Brahminism is as ancient as the hills.
When Bhishma was lying on his bed of arrows some
thousands of years ago and taught the Dharma Shastras to
the Pandavas in the presence of Sri Krishna, he also, like
Bhagavan, gave the true meaning of Brahminhood, as follows:
“Acts alone determine who is a Brahmana and who is
not. Performing all rituals and sacrifices does not make a
Brahmana. There is only one bondage, namely, that caused
by desire. He who is free from this bondage is a Brahmana.
He who restrains his senses, who is constantly in yogic samadhi
is a Brahmana: he is distinguished above all others, and
derives his joys from the Self alone.” (Shanti Parva of the
Mahabharata)\n--- 第79页 ---\n70 Reflections on Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
Thus a Brahmin is, truly speaking, a dweller in Brah-
man, a Jnani, or at least a foremost sadhaka, irrespective
of his physical descent. But the questioner is thinking only
of the sacred-thread wearers, who claim Brahminism by
right of descent, which the Srutis, Smritis, as in the above
quotation, and Bhagavan repudiate. Yet the Brahmins as
a caste have done a lot of good to India and to the world
by saving the Shastras from destruction, through staunch
adherence to tradition in the many vicissitudes through
which this subcontinent has passed in its long history. But
unfortunately, the wind of change that blew over the world
in the last century or two affected this caste also. The
majority of the Brahmins found themselves faced with
the need to struggle for their existence, which compelled
them to occupy positions which had been reserved for
the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. Yet, notwithstanding these
disadvantages they continue to stand in the forefront
where the study and practice of Yoga and Vedanta and
the spreading of Sanskrit knowledge are concerned, which
is a redeeming feature in the materialistic tendencies of
this age.
It is now clear that there exists no human agency of
any kind that can intervene between God and man. The
Jnani, the God-realised mukta, alone can help — not as
intermediary, but as teacher of, and guide to, the absolute
state of the Self.
19. “Dream and sleep do not make any appeal to me. The
sleep state is really dull; whereas the waking state is full
of beautiful and interesting things.”
Bhagavan: “What you consider to be filled with beautiful
and interesting things is indeed the dull and ignorant
state of sleep to the Jnani. (A Sanskrit saying goes) ‘The
wise one is wide awake just where darkness rules for\n--- 第80页 ---\nThe World 71
others.’ You must certainly wake up from the sleep which
is holding you at present.” 607
Note: The English lady who has asked this question seems
to have unwittingly given us the secret of Creation. She has
most probably hit on the cause of the disturbance of the
gunas in consciousness, which has given rise to the senses,
that is, the world. The disturbance is admittedly an inner
impulse, an urge to experience the “beautiful and interesting
things”, and lo! the beautiful and interesting things are. The
formless, colourless, tasteless, smell-less, soundless state of
the pure being becomes intolerably ‘dull’, and the stir in
consciousness takes place to spread a dream, to erect a
picture-house in order to enjoy a kaleidoscopic show, this
world of multiplicity. At all events the desire of this lady for
beauty, is the cause of this body of hers, which permits her
to enjoy “beauty”.
Now the question arises, if the questioner is so devoted
to the beautiful things of this world, why does she leave hem
daily to seek the “dullness” of sleep? She is hardly consistent
in her loyalty to beauty when she deliberately and even
longingly forsakes it for the uncouth, obscure sleep — not
once in a blue moon, but at least three hundred and sixty-
five times a year. She ought seriously to think that there is
something uncanny, something mysterious in her ardently
seeking what she ardently dislikes, namely, dull sleep. Some
enquirers do not care so cast a glance — even when reminded
by sages — at their conditions in the sleep state, taking it to
be irrelevant to their questions. They imagine themselves
well-established in a solid world of truth, and there can be
no sense in taking them out of it into a world of shadows
and mist. But the fact remains that the comparison and
coordination of all the three states are most essential for the