\n--- 第1页 ---\nDR. PAUL BRUNTON
A SEARCH IN
SECRET
INDIA\n--- 第2页 ---\n$12.95
A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
This is the famous classic that has sold more than a
quarter million copies.
It is the story of this celebrated writer's spiritual
odyssey, his journey up and down India to seek out and
interview holy people. We meet such fascinating figures
as Meher Baba - the silent Messiah; Shri Shankara - the
spiritual Head of South India; the Master Mahasaya;
Sahabji Maharaj: Hazrat Babajan - a woman fakir;
Vishudhananda - the Magician; and many others.
The reader will especially relish the account of how Paul
Brunton met his own guru, Shri Ramana Maharshi, the
sage of Arunachala. Because of this book, Ramana
became well known within India and throughout the
West. Today there are Ramanashrams all over the
world.
The London Times said of A Search in Secret India,
"His work is excellent. It has life, color, movement.
Readers will find their interest unflagging from the first
page to the last." Students on any spiritual path will en
joy sharing this experience with Paul Brunton.
SAMUEL WEISER, INC.
Box 612
York Beach, Maine 03910
Cover design by Alden Cole\n--- 第3页 ---\nThe works of Dr Brunton
In chronological order
A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
THE SECRET PATH
A SEARCH IN SECRET EGYPT
A MESSAGE FROM ARUNACHALA
A HERMIT IN THE HIMALAYAS
THE QUEST OF THE OVERSELF
DISCOVER YOURSELF
INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND MODERN CULTURE
THE HIDDEN TEACHING BEYOND YOGA
THE WISDOM OF THE OVERSELF
THE SPIRITUAL CRISIS OF MAN\n--- 第4页 ---\nA SEARCH IN
SECRET
INDIA
DR. PAUL BRUNTON
SAMUEL WEISER, INC.
York Beach, Maine\n--- 第5页 ---\nFirst American paperback published in 1970 by
Samuel Weiser, Inc.
Box 612
York Beach, Maine 03910-0612
Revised edition, 1985
Reprinted, 1994
Copyright © 1985 Kenneth Thurston Hurst
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopy, without permission in writing from Samuel Weiser,
Inc. Reviewers may quote brief passages.
First published in England in 1934 by Rider & Co., London
First American edition published in 1935 by E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc.,
New York. Copyright © 1935 E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc.
Copyright © 1962 renewed by Paul Brunton.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 83-50400
ISBN 0-87728-602-7
MG
Cover art is a reproduction of the painting Remember, by Nicholas
Roerich. Copyright © 1985 Nicholas Roerich Museum. Reproduced
by permission.
Printed in the United States of America
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
the American National Standard for Permanence of Paper for Printed
Library Materials Z39.48-1984.\n--- 第6页 ---\nCONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 3
A PERSONAL NOTE 5
FOREWORD TO THE REVISED EDITION 7
FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION 9
PREFACE 11
I. WHEREIN I Bow TO THE READER 13
II. A PRELUDE TO THE QUEST 21
III. A MAGICIAN OUT OF EGYPT 35
IV. I MEET A MESSIAH 46
V. THE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 66
VI. THE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH 86
VII. THE SAGE WHO NEVER SPEAKS 104
VIII. WITH THE SPIRITUAL HEAD OF SOUTH INDIA 117
IX. THE HILL OF THE HOLY BEACON 134
X. AMONG THE MAGICIANS AND HOLY MEN 164
XI. THE WONDER-WORKER OF BENARES 189
XII. WRITTEN IN THE STARS! 205
XIII. THE GARDEN OF THE LORD 226
XIV. AT THE PARSEE MESSIAH'S HEADQUARTERS 253
XV. A STRANGE ENCOUNTER 263
XVI. IN A JUNGLE HERMITAGE 277
XVII. TABLETS OF FORGOTTEN TRUTH 295\n--- 第7页 ---\nLIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
The following illustrations will be found between pages 116 and 117.
THE GREAT TEMPLE OF ARUNACHALA AND THE HILL OF THE HOLY BEACON
YOGIS' CAVES HEWN OUT OF SOLID MOUNTAIN ROCK
THE CAVE HOME OF SHRI SADGURU MEHER BABA
THE "NEW MESSIAH"
HAZRAT BABAJAN, THE WOMAN FAQUEER
UPASANI MAHARAJ
BRAMA SITTING IN HIS FAVOURITE YOGA POSTURE
THE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER
SHRI SHANKARA, THE SPIRITUAL HEAD OF SOUTH INDIA
INTERIOR OF DILWARA TEMPLE
IN THE MUHAMMEDAN MOSQUE
THE MASTER MAYASAYA
SARADA DEVI, "THE HOLY MOTHER"
BADREENATH SATHU
EESWARA SWAMI
WANDERING SNAKE CHARMERS
COMMON FAQUEERS OF AN INFERIOR ORDER AT BENARES
THE RIVER BANK AT BENARES
VISHUDHANANDA THE MAGICIAN
TWILIGHT OVER THE JUMNA
SAHABJI MAHARAJ
THE GATEWAY TO JEHANGIR'S PALACE, AGRA
YOUNG RAMANA, THE FUTURE MAHARISHEE
THE MAHARISHEE OR GREAT SAGE
YOGI RAMIAH
RAMIAH'S QUAINT ABODE\n--- 第8页 ---\nA PERSONAL NOTE
Dr. Paul Brunton died July 27, 1981, in Vevey, Switzerland.
Born in London in 1898, he authored thirteen books from "A
Search in Secret India" published in 1934 to "The Spiritual
Crisis of Man" in 1952. Dr. Brunton is generally recognized as
having introduced yoga and meditation to the West, and for
presenting their philosophical background in non-technical
language.
His mode of writing was to jot down paragraphs as inspira
tion occurred. Often these were penned on the backs of
envelopes or along margins of newspapers as he strolled amid
the flower gardens bordering Lac Leman. They later were
typed and classified by subject. He then would edit and meld
these paragraphs into a coherent narrative.
Paul Brunton had lived in Switzerland for twenty years. He
liked the mild climate and majestic mountain scenery. Visitors
and correspondence came from all over the world. He played
an important role in the lives of many.
"P.B.", as he is known to his followers, was a gentle man. An
aura of kindliness emanated from him. His scholarly learning
was forged in the crucible of life. His spirituality shone forth
like a beacon. But he discouraged attempts to form a cult
around him: "You must find your own P.B. within
yourselves," he used to say.
KTH\n--- 第9页 ---\nFOREWORD TO THE REVISED EDITION
A
Search in Secret India was an instant success when published
in 1934. It continues to be popular after many reprintings,
and has been translated into several languages. Written at
the age of thirty-five, it was my father's first book. To mark the
occasion, he adopted the pen name of Paul Brunton.
This is the story of his personal odyssey, his search for holy
men to guide him on his quest. To this task he brought all his
professional journalistic skills coupled with an extensive
background in spiritual research.
My father was a pathfinder. In this book he introduced the
terms yoga and meditation to the Western world. He travelled the
length and breadth of the sub-continent interviewing yogis,
fakirs, and mystics, exploring a side of India previously unknown
to foreigners. His story became a tale of high spiritual
adventure.
Fifty years later I retraced my father's steps and journeyed
around India giving "in memoriam" lectures in his honor. I
learned that his name is still held in highest esteem. Many
Indians told me they discovered their country's spiritual
dimension from this very book. I made a pilgrimage to the same
ashram he discovered and offered my obeisance in the
meditation hall where Ramana Maharshi had lived. I saw the
small bungalow my father had inhabited, and I gazed up at
towering Arunachala.
The highlight of my trip was my encounter with His Holiness
Shri Shankara Acharya, the Spiritual Head of South India, whom
my father describes in Chapter VIII. I had no prior intention of
meeting him, but upon leaving the Ramanashram, decided to
seek him out. After driving along country roads for three hours
and locating the village where he was staying, history seemed to
repeat itself as I was told there was no chance of my being\n--- 第10页 ---\n8 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
granted an audience with him. However, a friendly disciple
agreed to submit my card and returned with the news that His
Holiness would received me at the rear of the temple, to avoid
the crowds milling in front. His slight figure, clad in a saffron
robe, reflected his ninety-one years. I told him I was the son of
Paul Brunton. He replied briefly. The interpreter informed me,
"He knows!" His Holiness spoke again. "He has been waiting for
you! He has been expecting you," said the interpreter. But how
did he even know of me? How did he know I was in India, I
wondered to myself? I held out a copy of this book and showed
him his photograph, taken when he was thirty-eight. "I know!"
was his comment.
At this point I had hoped to elicit his views on the world
situation as had my father previously. But suddenly all questions
melted, as I felt an onrush of peace and love. All I could do was
prostrate myself in the time-honored tradition at the feet of His
Holiness as he gave me his blessing. He then put around my neck
a sacred mala, a garland fashioned from fragrant sandalwood. I
wear it daily.
Thus the wheel came full circle half a century later.
Kenneth Thurston Hurst
August, 1985\n--- 第11页 ---\nFOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION
by
SIR FRANCIS YOUNGHUSBAND, K.C.I.E., K.C.S.I., CLE.
"SACRED INDIA" would be as apt a title for this book. For
it is a quest for that India which is only secret because it is
so sacred. The holiest things in life are not bruited abroad
in public. The sure instinct of the human soul is to keep them
withdrawn in the inmost recesses accessible to few - perhaps to
none. Certainly only to those who care for spiritual things.
And with a country as with an individual. The most sacred
things a country keeps secret. It would not be easy for a stranger
to discover what England holds most sacred. And it is the same
with India. The most sacred part of India is the most
secret.
Now secret things require much searching for; but those who
seek will find. Those who seek with their whole heart and with
the real determination to find will at last discover the
secret.
Mr. Brunton had that determination, and he did in the end
find. The difficulties were very great though. For in India, as
everywhere else, there is much spurious spirituality through
which a way must be forced before the true can be found. There
is an innumerable crowd of mental acrobats and contortionists
through which the seeker after pure spirituality must elbow his
way. These men have trained their mental as well as bodily
muscles till they are extraordinarily efficient They have exercised
powers of concentration till they have nearly complete control
over their mental processes. Many of them have developed what
we call occult powers.\n--- 第12页 ---\n10 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
These are all interesting enough in their way and are well
worth study by scientific men interested in psychic phenomena.
But they are not the real thing. They are not the springs whence
spirituality comes gushing.
They do not form the secret sacred India that Mr. Brunton
was seeking. He saw them. He noted them. He describes them.
But he pushed through them. Spirituality at its finest and purest
is what he wanted. And this he found at last.
Remote from the haunts of men, deep in the jungles to
which - or to the Himalayas - the holiest men in India always
return, Mr. Brunton found the very embodiment of all that India
holds most sacred. The Maharishee - the Great Sage - was the
man who made most appeal to Mr. Brunton. He is not the only
one of his kind. Up and down India others - not many, but a
very, very few - may be found. They represent the true genius of
India, and it is through them that the Mighty Genius of the
Universe manifests Himself in peculiar degree.
They, therefore, are among the objects most worth searching
for on this earth. And in this book we have the results of one
such quest.
FRANCIS YOUNGHUSBAND\n--- 第13页 ---\nPREFACE
S
ince its original publication in 1934, so much has changed in
India that many details of this narrative will seem foreign to
today's reader. However, the encounters described in A
Search in Secret India have lost nothing of their value over the
years, and I still fully affirm the fundamental truth of this
work.
At the time this book was written, two important groups of
mystics existed in India. The well known mystics were snake
charmers, hypnotists, soothsayers, and others, who developed
special abilities and attained a certain power in their domain. The
other group consisted of people who searched for God through
various meditation practices. This group of mystics was smaller in
number, but they could be found scattered across the whole of
India, and they were very important people in Indian
culture.
Contacts with Western educational methods and achievements,
threats of Japanese and Chinese invasions, as well as the
realization of the necessity for a higher standard of living, led the
younger Indian people to a more secular and more science-
oriented world view. Nehru's policy of modernization and
industrialization favored this, while mysticism, metaphysics and
yoga promised no great material advantages.
A beneficial result of these changes has enabled women to
have more freedom than before. Ananda Mayee leaves her main
Ashram in old Benares to wander across the land visiting and
teaching her disciples. She is greeted with reverance and
admiration, and even met with Nehru on her travels. It is no
longer easy for fanatics, charlatans and those obsessed by religious
delusions to exploit the local villagers. Progress in the larger cities
has caused city dwellers to become more and more motivated by
political passions, and their disputes are sometimes violent.
When I was there, these people were much more friendly.\n--- 第14页 ---\n12 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
Most of the Indian sages whom I portray have parted form the
earth, but I shall never forget them. Two of these sages have
made the most profound impression on me: one is the
Maharishee of Arunachala, who has crossed the threshold of
death; the other is Shri Shankara Acharya of Kanchi,* who is the
spiritual leader of South India. He is widely respected by all those
whom I consider competent to evaluate the spiritual attainment
of a man, and he is, of all of India's living holy men, by far the
most enlightened.
It is perhaps appropriate to mention another very special
person, who for some years has lived as a refugee in the foothills
of the Himalayas: the Dalai Lama of Tibet. Although still a young
man, he has a profound knowledge of the teachings of
Buddhism. To the enemies who so cruelly fight to suppress his
homeland, he has demonstrated an attitude that comes close to
that of Jesus.
When I first wrote this book, I expressed my regrets that so
few people in the West seemed interested in "the Spiritual
India." These regrets no longer apply. In the course of the last 20
or 30 years, Westerners have begun to journey to India and the
Ashrams of well-known Yoga masters. Many serious books have
been published in Western languages in which religious-
philosophical Indian writings are presented and explained. What
was once the search of a few has now become the longing of
hundreds from Europe and the United States.
Paul Brunton
Rome, February 1967
*Not to be confused with three other sages of the same name in North,
East, and West India.
(Publisher's Note: Ananda Mayee is no longer living.)\n--- 第15页 ---\nA SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
CHAPTER I
WHEREIN I BOW TO THE READER
T
HERE is an obscure passage in the yellowed book of
Indian life which I have endeavoured to elucidate
for the benefit of Western readers. Early travellers
returned home to Europe with weird tales of the Indian
faqueers and even modern travellers occasionally bring
similar stories.
What is the truth behind those legends which come ever and
anon to our ears, concerning a mysterious class of men called
Yogis1 by some and faqueers by others? What is the truth
behind the fitful hints which reach us intimating that there
exists in India an old wisdom that promises the most extra
ordinary development of mental powers to those who practise
it? I set out on a long journey to find it and the following
pages summarize my report.
"Summarize" I say, because the inexorable exigencies of
space and time required me to write of one Yogi where I had
met more. Therefore I have selected a few who interested me
most, and who seemed likely to interest the Western world.
One heard much of certain so-called holy men who possessed
repute of having acquired deep wisdom and strange powers;
so one travelled through scorching days and sleepless nights
to find them - only to find well-intentioned fools, scriptural
slaves, venerable know-nothings, money-seeking conjurers,
jugglers with a few tricks, and pious frauds. To fill my pages
with the records of such people would be worthless to the
reader and is a distasteful task to me. Therefore I omit the
tale of time wasted upon them.
1 Pronounced Yogees.
13\n--- 第16页 ---\n14 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
I feel quite humbly that I have been privileged to see a
remote aspect of India seldom seen and less understood by
ordinary travellers. Among the English residents in that vast
land only an infinitesimal fraction has cared to study this
aspect, and of this fraction very few were free enough to
examine it more deeply and give their report, for official
dignity must needs be respected. Therefore, English writers
who have touched on this subject swing over to a hearty
scepticism which, by its very nature, renders many sources of
native knowledge not readily available to them, and which
causes the Indian who really knows something about the less
superficial side of the matter to shrink from discussing it with
them. The white man will, in most cases, possess but an
imperfect acquaintance with the Yogis, if he knows them at
all, and certainly not with the best of them. The latter are
now but a mere handful in the very country of their origin.
They are exceedingly rare, are fond of hiding their true attain
ment from the public, and prefer to pose as ignoramuses. In
India, in Tibet and in China, they get rid of the Western
traveller who may happen to blunder in upon their privacy,
by maintaining a studied appearance of insignificance and
ignorance. Perhaps they would see some sense in Emerson's
abrupt phrase : "To be great is to be misunderstood"; I do
not know. Anyway, they are mostly recluses who do not care
to mingle with mankind. Even when met with they are
unlikely to break their reserve except after some period of
acquaintance. Hence little has been written in Western con
tinents about the strange life of these Yogis and even that little
remains vague.
The reports of Indian writers are indeed available, but they
must be read with great care. It is an unfortunate fact that the
Hindus lack any critical approach to these matters and will mix
hearsay with fact quite indiscriminately. Therefore such
reports diminish greatly in truth as documentary records.
When I saw the cataract of credulity which covers so many
Eastern eyes, I thanked Heaven for such scientific training as
the West has given me and for the common sense attitude
which journalistic experience had instilled in me. There is
a basis of fact underlying much Oriental superstition, but
vigilance is needed to discover it. I was compelled to keep
a critical but not hostile eye widely open wherever I went.
Those who learned that I was interested in the mystical and
miraculous, apart from my philosophical concerns, applied
liberal paint and plentiful varnish to their few facts; many\n--- 第17页 ---\nWHEREIN I BOW TO THE READER 15
would think nothing of indulging in breath-taking exaggera
tions. I might have spent my time trying to teach them
that Truth is so strong she can stand upon her own legs
without falling to the ground, but I had other things to do.
I felt glad, however, that I had preferred to gain my knowl
edge of Oriental wonders at first hand, just as I prefer Christ's
wisdom to his commentators' ignorance. I searched through
a welter of crass superstitions, incredible impostures and
ancient pretensions for those things which are true, which
will stand the acid test of thorough investigation. I flatter
myself that I could never have done this did I not contain
within my complex nature the two elements of scientific
scepticism and spiritual sensitivity, elements which usually
range themselves in sharp conflict and flagrant opposition.
I have titled this book Secret India because it tells of an India
which has been hidden from prying eyes for thousands of years,
which has kept itself so exclusive that to-day only its rapidly
disappearing remnants are left. The manner in which the
Yogis kept their knowledge so esoteric may appear selfish to us
in these democratic days, but it helps to account for their
gradual disappearance from visible history. Thousands of
Englishmen live in India and hundreds visit it each year. Yet
few know anything of what may one day prove more worthy to
the world than even the prized pearls and valuable stones
which ships bring us from India. Fewer still have taken the
trouble to go out of their way to find the adepts in Yoga,1 while
not one Englishman in a thousand is prepared to prostrate
himself before a brown, half-naked figure in some lonely cave
or in a disciple-filled room. Such is the inevitable barrier
imposed by this form of caste that even men of generous
character and developed intellect, if suddenly taken from their
habitations in the British quarters and set down in such a cave,
would find a Yogi's company uncongenial and his ideas unin
telligible.
Yet the Englishman in India, whether soldier, civil servant,
business man or traveller, is not to be blamed because he is too
proud to squat on the mat of the Yogi. Quite apart from the
business of upholding British prestige, doubtless an important
and necessary procedure, the kind of holy man he usually
encounters is more likely to repel than attract. It is certainly
no loss to avoid such a man. Nevertheless it is a pity that after
a sojourn of many years the English resident will often leave
1 Pronounced Yohg. Its spelling is unphonetic.\n--- 第18页 ---\n16 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
the country in blameless ignorance of what lies behind the
frontal brain of an Indian sage.
I plainly remember my interview with a Cockney under the
shadow of Trichinopoly's gigantic rock fort. For over twenty
years he had held a responsible post on the Indian railways.
It was inevitable that I should ply him with many questions
about his life in this sunburnt land. Finally I trotted out my
pet interrogation, "Have you met any Yogis?"
He looked at me somewhat blankly and then replied :
'Yogis? What are they? Some kind of animal?"
Such ignorance would have been perfectly pardonable had
he stayed at home within the sound of Bow Bells; now, after
twenty-six years' residence in the country, it was perfectly
blissful. I permitted it to remain undisturbed.
Because I put pride underfoot in moving among the varied
peoples who inhabit Hindustan; because I gave them a ready
understanding and an intellectual sympathy, a freedom from
finicky prejudice and a regard for character irrespective of
colour; and because I had sought Truth all my life and was
prepared to accept whatsoever Truth brought in its train, I
am able to write this record. I picked my way through a crowd
of superstitious fools and self-styled faqueers in order to sit at
the feet of true sages, there to learn at first hand the real teach
ings of Indian Yoga. I squatted on the floor in many a secluded
hermitage, surrounded by brown faces and hearing strange
dialects. I sought out those reserved and reclusive men, the
best Yogis, and listened humbly to their oracular instruction. I
talked for hours with the Brahmin pundits of Benares, discuss
ing the age-old questions of philosophy and belief which have
tormented the mind and troubled the heart of man since he
first began to think. I stopped now and then to divert myself
with the magician and wonder-worker, and strange incidents
crossed my trails.
I wanted to gather the real facts about the Yogis of to-day by
the method of first-hand investigation. I prided myself that
experience as a journalist fitted me to draw out, with the least
possible delay, much of the information which I sought; that
sitting at the editorial desk and curtly wielding the blue pencil
had trained me to become ruthlessly critical in separating wheat
from chaff; and that the contact with men and women in
every grade of life which the profession generally gives, with
ragged mendicants as well as well-fed millionaires, would help me
move just a little more smoothly through the variegated masses of
India, among whom I searched for those strange men, the Yogis.\n--- 第19页 ---\nWHEREIN I BOW TO THE READER 17
On the other side of the sheet I had lived an inner life totally
detached from my outward circumstance. I spent much of
my spare time in the study of recondite books and in little-
known bypaths of psychological experiment. I delved into
subjects which always have been wrapped in Cimmerian
mystery. To these items must be added an inborn attraction
towards things Oriental. The East, before my first visit, threw
out vast tentacles that gripped my soul; ultimately they drew
me to study the sacred books of Asia, the learned commen
taries of her pundits and the inscribed thoughts of her sages,
so far as English translations could be procured.
This dual experience proved of great value. It taught me
never to permit my sympathy with Oriental methods of probing
life's mysteries, subvert my scientific desire of critically and
impartially finding the facts. Without that sympathy I could
never have gone among people and into places where the
average Englishman in India may disdain to tread. Without
that strict, scientific attitude I might have been led away into
the wilderness of superstition, as so many Indians seem to
have been led away. It is not easy to conjoin qualities which
are usually held to be contradictory, but I sincerely tried to
hold them in sane balance.
§
That the West has little to learn from present-day India, I
shall not trouble to deny, but that we have much to learn from
Indian sages of the past and from the few who live to-day, I
unhesitatingly assert. The white tourist who "does" the chief
cities and historical sights and then steams away with disgust
at the backward civilization of India is doubtless justified in
his depreciation of it. Yet a wiser kind of tourist shall one day
arise who will seek out, not the crumbling ruins of useless
temples, nor the marbled palaces of dissipated kings long dead,
but the living sages who can reveal a wisdom untaught by our
universities.
Are these Indians mere idlers sprawling in the fierce tropic
sun? Have they done nothing, thought nothing that is of worth
to the rest of the world? The traveller who can see only their
material degeneration and mental flabbiness has not seen far.
Let him substitute consideration for his contempt and he may
open sealed lips and hidden doors.
Grant that India has nodded and snored for centuries;
grant that even to-day there exist millions of peasants in this\n--- 第20页 ---\n18 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
land who suffer the same illiteracy, share the same outlook
blended of puerile superstition and kindergarten religion as did
English peasants of the fourteenth century. Grant further
that the Brahmin pundits in native centres of learning waste
their useless years splitting sacerdotal hairs and drawing
metaphysical wire as subtly as our own medieval scholastics
ever did. Yet there still remains a small but priceless residue
of culture classified under the generic term Yoga, which proffers
benefits to mankind as valuable in their own way as any prof
fered by the Western sciences. It can bring our bodies nearer
the healthy condition which Nature intended them to possess;
it can bestow one of modern civilization's most urgent needs -
a flawless serenity of mind; and it can open the way to enduring
treasures of the spirit to those who will labour for them. I
admit that this great wisdom hardly belongs to India's present,
but to her past; that this guarded knowledge of Yoga flourishes
little to-day when once it must have had worthy professors and
faithful students. It may be that the secrecy in which it was
carefully enshrouded succeeded in killing all spread of this
ancient science; I do not know.
It is perhaps not amiss, then, if one asks one's Western
fellows to look Eastward, not for a new faith, but for a few
pebbles of knowledge to cast upon our present heap. When
Orientalists like Burnouf, Colebrooke and Max Muller appeared
upon learning's scene and brought us some of the literary
treasures of India, the savants of Europe began to understand
that the heathens who inhabited that country were not so
stupid as our own ignorance had presumed. Those clever
people who profess to find Asiatic learning empty of useful
thoughts for the West thereby prove their own emptiness.
Those practical persons who would fling the epithet "stupid"
at its study, succeed only in flinging it at their own narrow-
mindedness. If our ideas about life are to be wholly deter
mined by a mere accident of space, by the chance that we
were born in Bristol instead of Bombay, then we are not worthy
the name of civilized man. Those who close their minds to the
entrance of all Eastern ideas, close them also to fine thoughts,
deep truths and worth-while psychological knowledge. Who
ever will poke about among this musty lore of the Orient in
the hope of finding some precious gems of strange fact and
stranger wisdom, will find his quest no vain one.\n--- 第21页 ---\nWHEREIN I BOW TO THE READER 19
§
I journeyed Eastwards in search of the Yogis and their
hermetic knowledge. The thought of finding a spiritual light
and diviner life was also entertained, though it was not my
primary purpose. I wandered along the banks of India's holy
rivers - the quiet, grey-green Ganges, the broad Jumna and the
picturesque Godavari - in this quest. I circled the country.
India took me to her heart and the vanishing remnant of her
sages opened many a door for the unfamiliar Westerner.
Not so long ago I was among those who regard God as
a hallucination of human fancy, spiritual truth as a mere
nebula and providential justice as a confection for infantile
idealists. I, too, was somewhat impatient of those who con
struct theological paradises and who then confidently show
you round with an air of being God's estate agents. I had
nothing but contempt for what seemed to be the futile,
fanatical efforts of uncritical theorisers.
If, therefore, I have begun to think a little differently about
these matters, rest assured that good cause has been given me.
Yet I did not arrive at paying allegiance to any Eastern creed;
indeed, those which matter I had already studied intellectually
much earlier. I did arrive at a new acceptance of the Divine.
This may seem quite an insignificant and personal thing to do,
but as a child of this modern generation, which relies on hard
facts and cold reason, and which lacks enthusiasm for things
religious, I regard it as quite an achievement. This faith was
restored in the only way a sceptic could have it restored, not
by argument, but by the witness of an overwhelming experience.
And it was a jungle sage, an unassuming hermit who had
formerly lived for six years in a mountain cave, who promoted
this vital change in my thinking. It is quite possible that he
could not pass a matriculation examination, yet I am not
ashamed to record in the closing chapters of this book my
deep indebtedness to this man. The production of such sages
provides India with sufficient credentials to warrant attention
from intelligent Westerners. The secret India's spiritual life
still exists, despite the storms of political agitation which now
hide it, and I have tried to give authentic record of more than
one adept who has attained a strength and serenity for which
we lesser mortals wistfully yearn.
I have borne witness in the book to other things also, things
marvellous and weird. They seem incredible now, as I sit and\n--- 第22页 ---\n20 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
type my narrative through the inked ribbon amid the matter-of-
fact surroundings of English country-side; indeed, I wonder
at my temerity in writing them down for a sceptical world to
read. But I do not believe the present materialistic ideas which
dominate the world will remain for all time; already one can
perceive prophetic indications of a coming change of thought.
Yet quite frankly I do not believe in miracles. Neither do most
men of my generation. But I do believe that our knowledge of
Nature's laws is incomplete, and that when the advance guard
of scientists who are pushing forward into unexplored territory
have found out a few more of those laws, we shall then be able
to do things which are tantamount to miracles.\n--- 第23页 ---\nCHAPTER II
A PRELUDE TO THE QUEST
T
HE geography master takes a long, tapering pointer and
moves over to the large, varnished linen map which
hangs before a half-bored class. He indicates a
triangular red patch which juts down to the Equator, and then
makes a further attempt to stimulate the obviously lagging
interest of his pupils. He begins in a thin, drawling voice and
with the air of one about to make a hierophantic revelation:
"India has been called the brightest jewel in the British
crown..."
At once a boy with moody brow, half wrapt in reverie, gives
a sudden start and draws his far-flung imagination back into
the stolid, brick-walled building which constitutes his school.
The sound of this word INDIA falling on the tympanum
of his ears, or the sight of it caught up by the optic nerve of his
eyes from a printed page, carries thrilling and mysterious
connotations of the unknown. Some inexplicable current of
thought brings it repeatedly before him.
When the mathematics master believes that this pupil is
laboriously working at an algebraical problem, little does he
know that the young rascal uses the school's desk for ulterior
purposes. For under the cover of skilfully arrayed books he
rapidly sketches turbaned heads, dusky faces and spice-laden
ships being loaded from flat junks.
The youthful years pass, but this interest in Hindustan
remains undimmed. Nay, it spreads and embraces all Asia
within its eager tentacles.
Ever and anon he makes wild projects to go there. He
will run away to sea. Surely it would then be a mere
matter of enterprise to get some brief glimpse of India?
Even when these projects come to nought, he talks rhetorically
to his schoolmates until one of them falls an easy victim to his
immature enthusiasm.
Thereafter they conspire in silence and move in secret.
21\n--- 第24页 ---\n22 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
They plan an adventurous tramp across the face of Europe;
it is then to continue into Asia Minor and Arabia until the port
of Aden is reached. The reader, contemplating the innocent
boldness of that long walk, will smile. They believe that a
friendly ship's captain could be approached at Aden. He
would undoubtedly prove a kindly, sympathetic man. He
would take them aboard his steamer and a week later they would
begin to explore India.
Preparations for this protracted excursion go on apace.
Money is thriftily collected, and what they naively imagine to
be an explorer's outfit is secretly brought together. Maps and
guide-books are carefully consulted, the coloured pages and
attractive photographs raising their wanderlust to fever heat.
Finally they are able to fix the date when they intend to snap
their fingers at destiny and leave the country. Who knows
what lies around the corner?
They might have saved some of their youthful energy and
conserved some of their early optimism. For on an unfortunate
day the second boy's guardian discovers the preparations,
elicits further details of the affair, and comes down with a
stern hand. What they suffer as a result is not to be related!
The enterprise is reluctantly abandoned.
The desire to view India never leaves the promoter of that
unfortunate expedition. The dawn of manhood, however,
brings bonds in the form of other interests and holds his feet
with enchaining duties. That desire has to be put regretfully
in the background.
Time turns page after page of the calendar of years until he
meets unexpectedly with a man who gives a temporary but vivid
life to the old ambition. For the stranger's face is dusky, his
head is turbaned, and he comes from the sun-steeped land of
Hindustan.
§
I fling out the fine net of remembrance to sweep the past
years for pictures of that day when he steps into my life. The
tide of autumn is fast ebbing, for the air is foggy and a bitter
cold creeps through my clothing. Clammy fingers of depression
strive hard to grip my failing heart.
I wander into a brightly-lit cafe and seek the borrowed
comfort of its warmth. A cup of hot tea - so potent at other
times - fails to restore my serenity. I cannot banish the
heavy atmosphere which surrounds me. Melancholy has\n--- 第25页 ---\nA PRELUDE TO THE QUEST
23
determined to make me serve her dark ends. Black curtains
cover the entrance to my heart.
This restlessness is difficult to endure and it ends by driving
me from the cafe into the open street. I walk without aim and
follow old tracks until I find myself in front of a small book
shop which I know well. It is an ancient building and harbours
equally ancient books. The proprietor1 is a quaint man, a
human relic surviving from an earlier century. This hustling
epoch has little use for him, but he has just as little use for this
epoch. He deals only in rare tomes and early editions, while
specializing in curious and recondite subjects. He possesses
a remarkable knowledge - so far as books can give it - of
learning's bypaths and out-of-the-way matters. From time
to time, I like to wander into the old shop and discuss them
with him.
I enter the place and greet him. For a while I finger the
yellowed pages of calf-bound volumes or peer closely into
faded folios. One ancient book engages my attention; it
seems somewhat interesting and I examine it more carefully.
The bespectacled bookseller notes my interest and, as is his
wont, commences what he imagines to be an argument anent
the book's subject - metempsychosis.
The old man follows habit and keeps the discussion to his
own side. He talks at length, appearing to know the pros and
cons of that strange doctrine better than my author, while
the classic authorities who have written about it are at his
finger-tips. In this way I glean much curious information.
Suddenly, I hear a man stirring at the far end of the shop
and, turning, I behold a tall figure emerge from the shadows
which hide a little inner room where the costlier books are
kept.
The stranger is an Indian. He walks toward us with an
aristocratic bearing and faces the bookseller.
"My friend," he says quietly, "pardon me for intruding.
I could not help overhearing you, while the subject you dis
cussed is of great interest to me. Now you quote the classical
authors who first mention this idea of man's continual rebirth
upon this earth. The deeper minds among those philosophic
Greeks, wise Africans and early Christian Fathers understood
this doctrine well, I agree. But where, do you think, did it
really originate?"
He pauses for a moment, but gives no time for a reply.
1 Now, alas, he has departed from terra firma and his shop has
disappeared with him!\n--- 第26页 ---\nA SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
24
"Permit me to tell you," he continues, smiling. "You
must look to India for the first acceptance of metempsychosis
in the Old World. It was a cardinal tenet among the people
of my land, even in remote antiquity."
The speaker's face fascinates me. It is unusual; it would
be distinguished-looking among a hundred Indians. Power
kept in reserve - this is my reading of his character. Piercing
eyes, a strong jaw and a lofty forehead make up the catalogue
of his features. His skin is darker than that of the average
Hindu. He wears a magnificent turban, the front of which is
adorned with a sparkling jewel. For the rest, his clothes are
European and finely tailored withal.
His slightly didactic statement does not appeal to the old
gentleman behind the counter; in fact, vigorous opposition
is offered to it.
"How can that be," comes the sceptical observation,
"when the East Mediterranean cities were flourishing centres
of culture and civilization in the pre-Christian era? Did not
the greatest intellects of antiquity live in the area which
embraced Athens and Alexandria? So, surely their ideas
were carried Southward and Eastward until India was reached?"
The Indian smiles tolerantly.
"Not at all," is his immediate reply. "What really happened
was quite the reverse of your assertion."
"Indeed! You seriously suggest that the progressive
West had to receive its philosophy from the laggard East?
No, sir!" expostulates the bookseller.
"Why not? Read your Apuleius again, my friend, and learn
how Pythagoras came to India, where he was instructed by
the Brahmins. Then notice how he began to teach the doctrine
of metempsychosis after his return to Europe. This is but a
single instance. I can find others. Your reference to the lag
gard East makes me smile. Thousands of years ago our sages
were pondering over the deepest problems while your own
countrymen were not even aware that such problems existed."
He stops curtly, looks intently at us, and waits for his words
to sink into our minds. I fancy the old bookseller is a little
perplexed. Never before have I seen him so struck into
silence or so obviously impressed by another man's intellectual
authority.
I have listened quietly to the other customer's words and
make no attempt to offer a remark. Now there arises a con
versational lull which all of us seem to recognize and to respect.
Soon the Indian turns abruptly and retires to the inner room,\n--- 第27页 ---\nA PRELUDE TO THE QUEST 25
only to emerge a couple of minutes later with a costly folio
which he has selected from the shelves. He pays for the book
and prepares to leave the shop. He reaches the door, whilst
I stare wonderingly at his departing figure.
Suddenly, he turns again and approaches me. He draws a
wallet out of his pocket and selects a visiting card.
"Would you care to pursue this conversation with me?"
he asks, half smiling. I am taken by surprise, but gladly agree.
He offers me the card, adding an invitation to dinner.
§
I set out toward evening to find the stranger's house, a
task not without its discomfort, for I am companioned by an
unpleasant fog which has descended thickly upon the streets.
An artist, I presume, would find a touch of romantic beauty
in these fogs which sometimes brood over the town and dim
its lights. My mind, however, is so intent upon the forth
coming meeting that I see no beauty and feel no unpleasantness
in the surrounding atmosphere.
A terminus is set to my travels by a massive gateway which
suddenly looms up. Two large lamps, as in greeting, are held
out by iron brackets. My entry into the house is followed by
a delightful surprise. For the Indian has given no hint of this
unique interior, upon which he has obviously lavished a fine
taste and free purse.
Let it suffice that I find myself in a great room, which might
be part of some Asiatic palace for aught I know, so exotically
is it furnished and so colourful are its gorgeous decorations.
With the closing of the outer door I leave behind the grey,
bleak Western world. The room has been decorated in a quaint
combination of Indian and Chinese styles. Red, black and gold
are the predominating colours. Resplendent tapestries, bearing
sprawling Chinese dragons, stretch across the walls. Carved
green dragon heads glare fiercely from all the corners, where
they support brackets which carry costly pieces of handicraft.
Two silken mandarin coats adorn both sides of the doorway.
Boldly patterned Indian rugs repose on the parquet floor,
one's shoes sinking delightfully into their thick pile. A
gigantic tiger skin stretches its full length in front of the hearth.
My eyes meet a small lacquered table which stands in one
corner. Upon it rests a black ebony shrine with gilded folding
doors. I glimpse the figure of some Indian god within the\n--- 第28页 ---\n26 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
recess. It is probably a Buddha, for the face is calm and
inscrutable and the two unwinking eyes gaze down at its nose.
My host greets me cordially. He is impeccably dressed in
a black dinner suit. Such a man would look distinguished in
any company in the world, I reflect. A few minutes later we
both sit down to dinner. Some delightful dishes are brought
to the table, and it is here that I receive my initiation into the
pleasures of curry, thus acquiring a taste which is never to
leave me. The servant who attends on us provides a picturesque
note, for he wears a white jacket and trousers, a golden sash
and spotless turban.
During the course of the meal our talk is superficial and
general, yet whatever my host says, whatever subject he
touches, his words invariably carry an air of finality. His
statements are so phrased that they leave one with little ground
for argument; his accents are so confident that his talk sounds
like the last word upon the matter. I cannot help being
impressed by his air of quiet assurance.
Over the coffee cups he tells me a little about himself. I
learn that he has travelled widely and that he possesses some
means. He regales me with vivid impressions of China -
where he has spent a year, of Japan - whose amazing future
he tersely predicts, of America, Europe and - strangest of all
- of life in a Christian monastery in Syria, where he had once
spent a period of retirement.
When we light our cigarettes he touches on the subject
which was mentioned at the bookshop. But it is evident that
he desires to talk of other things, for he soon leads the way to
larger issues, and broaches the subject of India's ancient
wisdom.
"Some of the doctrines of our sages have already reached
the West," he remarks impressively, "but in most cases the
real teachings have been misunderstood; in a few instances
they have somehow been falsified. However, it is not for me
to complain. What is India to-day? She is no longer
representative of the lofty culture of her past. The greatness
has gone out of her. It is sad, very sad. The masses hold
on to a few ideals at the cost of being enmeshed in a fussy
tangle of pseudo-religious fetters and unwise customs."
"What is the cause of this degeneration?" I ask him.
My host is silent. A minute slowly passes. I watch him
while his eyes begin to narrow until they are half-closed;
then he quietly breaks the silence.
"Alas, my friend! Once there were great seers in my land,\n--- 第29页 ---\nA PRELUDE TO THE QUEST 27
men who had penetrated the mysteries of life. Their advice
was sought by king and commoner. Under their inspiration
Indian civilization reached its zenith. To-day, where are they
to be found? Two or three may remain - unknown, un
recorded and far from the main stream of modern life. When
those great sages - Rishees, we call them - began to withdraw
from society, then our own decline also began."
His head droops till the chest must support his chin. A
sorrowful note has entered his voice with the last sentence.
For a while he seems withdrawn from me, his soul wrapped
in melancholy meditation.
His personality impresses me again as being provocatively
interesting and decidedly attractive. Eyes, dark and flashing,
reveal a keen mentality; voice, soft and sympathetic, reflects
a kindly heart. I feel anew that I like him.
The servant noiselessly enters the room and approaches the
lacquered table. He lights a joss stick and a blue haze rises to
the ceiling. The strange perfume of some Eastern incense
spreads around the room. It is not unpleasant.
Suddenly my host raises his head and looks at me.
"Did I tell you that two or three still remain?" he asks
queerly. "Ah, yes! I said that. Once I knew a great sage.
It was a privilege about which I rarely speak to others now.
He was my father, guide, master and friend. He possessed
the wisdom of a god. I loved him as if I were really his own
son. Whenever I stayed with him at fortunate intervals, I
knew then that life at its heart is good. Such was the effect
of his wonderful atmosphere. I, who have made art my hobby
and beauty my ideal, learnt from him to see the divine beauty
in men who were leprous, destitute or deformed; men from
whom I formerly shrank in horror. He lived in a forest
hermitage far from the towns. I stumbled upon his retreat
seemingly by accident. From that day I paid him several
visits, staying with him as long as I could. He taught me much.
Yes - such a man could give greatness to any country."
"Then why did he not enter public life and serve India?"
I question frankly.
The Indian shakes his head.
"It is difficult enough for us to understand the motives of
such an unusual man. It would be doubly difficult for you,
a Westerner, to understand him. His answer might probably
be that service can be rendered in secret through the telepathic
power of the mind; that influence can be exerted from a
distance in an unseen yet no less potent manner. He might\n--- 第30页 ---\n28 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
also say that a degenerate society must suffer its destiny until
the fated hour of relief strikes."
I confess to being puzzled by this answer.
"Quite so, my friend, I expected that," observes the other.
§
After that memorable evening I visit the Indian's home
many times, drawn by the lure of his unusual knowledge as
much as by the attractiveness of his exotic personality. He
touches some coiled spring among my ambitions and releases
into urgency the desire to fathom life's meaning. He stimulates
me, less to satisfy intellectual curiosity than to win a worth
while happiness.
One evening our conversation takes a turn which is destined
to have important results for me. He describes on occasions
the queer customs and peculiar traditions of his countrymen;
sometimes he portrays in words a few of the types who people
his amazing land. He drops a remark this evening anent a
strange type, the Yogi. I possess but a vague and incoherent
idea of what the term really means. It has come to my notice
a few times during the course of my reading, but on each
occasion the terms of reference differ so much from the others
that confusion is the natural result. So, when I hear my friend
use the word I stop him short and beg for further information.
"That I shall do with pleasure," he answers, "but I can
hardly tell you, in a single definition, what constitutes a Yogi.
No doubt, a dozen of my countrymen will define the word in
a dozen different ways. For instance, there are thousands of
wandering beggars who pass by this name. They swarm
through the villages and attend the periodic religious fairs in
droves. Many are only lazy tramps and others vicious ones,
while most are totally illiterate men, unaware of the history
and doctrines of the science of Yoga, under whose shelter
they masquerade."
He pauses to flick the ash off his cigarette.
"Go, however, to some place like Rishikesh, over which the
mighty Himalayas keep eternal guard. There you will find a
totally different class of men. They live in humble huts or
caves, eat little food and constantly pray to God. Religion is
their breath; it occupies their minds day and night. They
are mostly good men studying our sacred books and chanting
prayers. Yet they, too, are called Yogis. But what have\n--- 第31页 ---\nA PRELUDE TO THE QUEST 29
they in common with the beggars who prey on the ignorant
masses? You see how elastic the term is! Between these
two classes there are others who partake of the nature of both."
"And yet there seems to be much made of the mysterious
powers possessed by Yogis," I remark.
"Ah! now you must listen to a further definition," he
laughs back at me." There are strange individuals in solitary
retreats far from the big cities, in the seclusion of lonely
jungles or mountain caves, men who devote their entire
existence to practices which they believe will bring marvellous
powers. Some of these men will eschew all mention of religion
and scorn it; others, however, are highly religious; but all of
them unite in the struggle to wrest from Nature a mastery over
forces invisible and intangible. You see, India has never
been without her traditions of the mysterious, the occult, and
many are the stories told of those adepts who could perform
miraculous feats. Now these men, too, are called Yogis."
"Have you met such men? Do you believe these tradi
tions?" I ask innocently.
The other man is silent. He seems to be ruminating over
the form in which to couch his reply.
My eyes turn to the shrine which stands upon the lacquered
table. I fancy, in the soft light which fills our room, that the
Buddha is smiling benignantly at me from its lotus throne of
gilt wood. For half a minute I am ready to believe that there
is something uncanny in its atmosphere; and then the Indian's
clear voice breaks into my thoughts and arrests my wandering
fancies.
"Look!" he says quietly, holding something out for my
inspection. He has loosed it from under his collar. "I am a
Brahmin. This is my sacred thread. Thousands of years of
strict segregation have made certain qualities of character
instinctive in my caste. Western education and Western
travelling can never remove them. Faith in a higher power,
belief in the existence of supernatural forces, recognition of a
spiritual evolution among men - these things were born in
me as a Brahmin. I could not destroy them if I would, while
reason is overpowered by them whenever the issue comes to
battle. So, although I am quite in sympathy with the principles
and methods of your modern sciences, what other answer
can I give you, except this - I believe!"
He looks intently at me for a few moments. Then he
proceeds:
"Yes, I have met such men. Once, twice, three times.\n--- 第32页 ---\nA SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
30
They are difficult to come across. Once they were easier to
find, I believe, but to-day they have almost disappeared."
"But they still exist, I presume?"
"Most likely, my friend. To find them is another matter.
It would require a protracted search."
"Your master - was he one of them?"
"No, he belonged to a higher order. Did I not tell you that
he was a Rishee?"
The term needs some elucidation before my mind can digest
it. I tell him so.
"Higher than the Yogis stand the Rishees," he answers.
"Transfer the Darwinian theory to the realm of human
character; accept the Brahmin teaching that there is a
spiritual evolution running parallel with the physical one;
look upon the Rishees as men who have attained the crest
of this upward climb; then you may form some rough
conception of their greatness."
"Does a Rishee also perform those wonders of which we
hear?"
"Yes, he certainly does, but he will not value them for their
own sake, whereas many of the Yogi wonder-workers do.
Such powers arise in him naturally by reason of his great
development of will and mental concentration. They are not
his chief concern; he may even disdain them and use them
little. You see, his first purpose is to become inwardly some
thing akin to those divine beings of whom Buddha in the East
and Christ in the West are the most illustrious examples."
"But Christ worked miracles!"
"He did. But do you think he performed them for any
vain self-glory? Not so; he desired to help the souls of
ordinary people by thus catching their faith."
"Surely, if such men as Rishees existed in India, multitudes
would flock after them?" I conjecture.
"Undoubtedly - but they would first have to appear in
public and announce themselves for what they are. Only in
the most exceptional cases have Rishees ever been known to
do that. They prefer to live apart from the world. Those
who wish to perform a public work may emerge for a limited
time and then disappear again."
I object that such men could hardly be of much service to
their fellows if they hide themselves in inaccessible places.
The Indian smiles tolerantly.
"That is a matter which comes within the province of
your Western saying: 'Appearances are sometimes deceptive.'\n--- 第33页 ---\nA PRELUDE TO THE QUEST 31
Without intimate knowledge of these persons, the world is
not in a position to judge them accurately, if you will pardon
my saying so. I have mentioned that the Rishees did some
times live for a while in towns and move in society. In olden
times, when that was a little more frequent, their wisdom,
power and attainment became obvious to the public; their
influence was then openly acknowledged. Even Maharajahs
did not disdain to pay reverent homage to those great sages
and to consult them for guidance in their policies. But as a
matter of fact, it is certain that the Rishees prefer to exert
their influence in a silent and unknown manner."
"Well, I would like to meet such men," I mutter, half to
myself. "And I should certainly like to encounter some real
Yogis."
"You shall do so one day, without a doubt," he assures me.
"How do you know that? " I ask, somewhat startled.
"I knew it that day we first met," is the astonishing answer.
"It came to me as an intuition - does it matter what you call
it? - as a message deeply felt but inexplicable by outward
evidences. My master taught me how to train this feeling,
to develop it. Now, I have learnt to trust it implicitly."
"A modern Socrates guided by his daemon!" I remark
half-jocosely. "But tell me, when do you think your prophecy
will come true?"
He shrugs his shoulders.
"I am not a prophet. So I regret that I cannot date the
event for you."
I do not press him, though I suspect he could say more if
he would. I meditate upon the matter and then offer a
suggestion.
"I suppose you will return to your own country eventually.
If I am ready at the time, could we not travel together? Would
you not help me locate some of these men we have been dis
cussing?"
"No, my friend. Go alone. It will be better that you do
your own finding."
"It will be so difficult for a stranger," I complain.
"Yes - very difficult. But go alone; one day you will see
that I am right."
§
From that time I feel strongly that a momentous day will
dawn which will find me at anchor in the sunny East. I reflect\n--- 第34页 ---\n32 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
that if India has harboured such great men as the Rishees in the
past, and if, as my friend believes, there may be a few of them
still in existence, then the trouble of locating them might be
balanced by the reward of learning something of their wisdom.
Peradventure, I might then gain an understanding and content
which life has so far denied me. Even if I fail in such a quest,
the journey will not be a vain one. For those queer men, the
Yogis, with their magic, their mysterious practices and their
strange mode of living, excite my curiosity and arouse my
interest. The journalistic grindstone has sharpened to an
abnormal keenness my concern with the unusual. I am fascin
ated by the prospect of exploring such little-known trails. I
decide to carry out my fancy to its full proportions and, when
opportunity allows, take the first boat to India.
My dark-skinned friend, who has thus clinched and rendered
final this determination to trek towards the rising sun, con
tinues to receive me at his house for several months. He assists
me to take my bearings upon the swirling ocean of life, though
he always refuses to act as a pilot across the uncharted waters
which stretch ahead of me. To discover one's position, to be
made aware of latent possibilities, and to get one's vague ideas
clarified, is nevertheless of indubitable value to a young man.
It is not amiss, then, if I pay my meed of gratitude to that early
benefactor of mine. For a dark day comes when fate spins its
wheel once again, and we part. Within a few years I hear,
seemingly by accident, of his death.
Time and circumstance are not ready for my journey.
Ambition and desire lure a man into responsibilities from which
it is not easy to extricate himself. I can do little more than
resign myself to the life which hems me in, and watch and wait.
I never lose my faith in the Indian's prophecy. One day it
is strengthened by an unexpected confirmation.
Professional work throws me for several months into frequent
contact with a man for whom I entertain a high respect and
friendly regard. He is exceedingly astute and knows human
nature through every letter of its alphabet. Many years earlier
he held the post of Professor of Psychology at one of our
universities, but an academic life was not to his taste. He
deserted it for pastures where he could put his amazing range
of knowledge to more practical use. For a time he acted as
adviser to magnates of the business world. How often has he
boasted of drawing several retaining fees from the chiefs of
large firms!
He is born with the remarkable gift of inspiring others to\n--- 第35页 ---\nA PRELUDE TO THE QUEST 33
their best endeavours. Every person he meets - from office
boy to millionaire magnate - finds practical help and new
enthusiasm from the contact; sometimes they receive golden
advice. I make it a practice to take careful note of any counsel
he gives me, for his foresight and insight usually receive
startling verification in both business and personal matters.
I enjoy his company because he has succeeded in fusing the
elements of introspection and extrospection in his own nature,
with the result that he can talk profound philosophy one minute
and deal with a commercial report the next. Withal he is
never dull, always witty and radiating good-humour.
He admits me into the circle of intimate friendship and,
sometimes, we spend several hours at a time in mingled work
and pleasure. I never tire of listening to his talk, for its
latitude of subject enthrals me. I wonder often that one small
head can carry all he knows!
One night we go out to dine together in a little Bohemian
restaurant where pleasantly shaded lights and nicely cooked
food accompany each other. After the meal we find a full
moon resplendent in the heavens, and tempted by the witchery
of its poetic light, decide to walk homewards.
The conversation has been somewhat light and frivolous for
most of the evening, but as we walk on through the city's
quieter streets, it drifts into philosophical depths. The close
of our nocturnal peregrination finds us discussing subjects so
abstruse that some of my companion's clients would take fright
at the mere sound of the names. Outside his door, he turns
and proffers a hand in farewell. As he grips mine, he suddenly
addresses me in grave tones and says slowly:
"You ought never to have entered this profession. You are
really a philosopher caught up in the ink-slinging business of
writing. Why did you not become a university don and spend
your life in secluded research? For you like to put on those
carpet slippers of yours and walk around inside your brain.
You are trying to reach the very source of the mind. One day
you will go out to the Yogis of India, to the Lamas of Tibet and
the Zen monks of Japan. Then you will write some strange
records. Good night!"
"What do you think of these Yogis?"
The other man bends his head towards mine and half-
whispers in my ear:
"My friend, they know, they know! "
I walk away greatly puzzled. This Eastern journey is not
likely to happen for a long time ahead. I am sinking deeper and\n--- 第36页 ---\n34 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
deeper into a maze of activities from which escape becomes
proportionately more difficult. For a while pessimism seizes
me. Am I not doomed by destiny to remain imprisoned in this
maze of private bonds and personal ambitions?
Yet my guess at the unseen writ is wrong. Fate issues its
orders every day, and though we are not literate enough to be
able to read them, nevertheless we unconsciously move about
to obey! Before twelve months pass I find myself disembarking
at Alexandra Dock, Bombay; mingling with the motley life of
that Eastern city, and listening to the weird medley of Asiatic
tongues which contribute to its cacophony!\n--- 第37页 ---\nCHAPTER III
A MAGICIAN OUT OF EGYPT
I
T is a singular fact - and perhaps a significant one - that
before I can begin to try my luck in this strange quest,
fortune herself comes in quest of me. I have not even
taken the tourist's privilege of exploring the show places of
Bombay. All I know of the city can be comfortably written
down on a postcard. My trunks, save one, remain in a sedate,
unpacked condition. My sole activity consists in an attempt
to familiarize myself with my surroundings in the Hotel
Majestic, which a shipboard acquaintance had described as
one of the most comfortable hotels in the city. It is through
this activity, then, that I make a startling discovery. For,
staying as a fellow guest of the hotel, I find a member of the
magician's fraternity, a weaver of strange spells, in short, a
wonder-worker in the flesh!
Not that he is one of those juggling fellows, mind you, who
make their own and theatres' fortunes by bewildering jaded
audiences. He is not some clever individual attempting to
emulate the feats of Maskelyne and Devant in a less prosaic
environment than that of Regent Street. No! This man
belongs to the line of medieval sorcerers. He engages daily in
commerce with mysterious beings, invisible to normal human
eyes, but plain enough to his own! Such, at least, is the
peculiar reputation which he has created. The hotel staff
regard him with fearful looks and speak of him with bated
breath. Whenever he passes by, the other guests instinctively
break off conversation and a puzzled, questioning look comes
into their eyes. He makes no overtures to them and usually
insists on dining alone.
What makes him more intriguing in our eyes is that he
bears neither European nor Indian nationality; he is a traveller
from the country of the Nile; in very sooth, a magician out
of Egypt!
It is not easy for me to reconcile the appearance of Mahmoud
35\n--- 第38页 ---\n36 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
Bey with the sinister powers with which he has been credited.
Instead of the stern visage and lean body which I look for, I
observe a good-looking smiling face, a well-built figure with
massive shoulders and the quick walk of a man of action.
Instead of the white robe or voluminous cloak, he is sprucely
dressed in well-fitting, modern clothes. He looks like a hand
some Frenchman, such as one might see any evening in the
better restaurants of Paris.
I ruminate upon the matter for the rest of the day. Next
morning, I wake up with a clear-cut decision. Mahmoud Bey
must be forthwith interviewed. I shall "get his story," as
my fellow scribes of the Press might say.
I write a few lines, expressive of my desire, on the back of a
visiting card and then, in the right-hand corner, I draw in
tiny characters a certain symbol which will indicate that I am
not unfamiliar with the traditional side of his mysterious art
and which, I hope, may help me to obtain an interview. I
slip the card into the hand of a soft-footed servant, add a
silver rupee, and send him up to the magician's room.
Five minutes later the response arrives: "Mahmoud Bey
will see you at once, sir. He is just about to take breakfast
and invites you to join him."
This first success encourages me. The servant leads the
way upstairs and I find Mahmoud Bey seated at a table
whereon there is tea and toast and jam. The Egyptian does
not rise to greet me. Instead, he points to a chair opposite
him and says, in a firm, resonant voice:
"Please be seated. Excuse me, but I never shake hands."
He wears a loose grey dressing-gown. There is a leonine
mane of brown hair on his head. A curling lock strays over
his forehead. His teeth flash white in a charming smile as
he asks:
"You will share my breakfast, eh?"
I thank him. Over the cups I inform him of the awe-
inspired reputation which belongs to him in the hotel, and of
the prolonged meditation in which I have indulged before
having the temerity to approach him. He laughs heartily and
half raises a hand into the air, as a gesture of helplessness, but
says nothing.
After a pause, he asks: "Are you representing any paper?"
"No. I have come to India on a private mission - to
study some out-of-the-way things, and possibly make a few
notes for literary work."
"Will you stay here long?"\n--- 第39页 ---\nA MAGICIAN OUT OF EGYPT 37
"That depends on circumstances. I have fixed no period,"
I answer, with a queer feeling that the affair is becoming a
case of the interviewer interviewed. But his next words
reassure me:
"I, too, am here on an extended visit. Possibly one year,
possibly two years. After that, I am off for the Far East. I
would like to see the world and then return home to Egypt,
if Allah permits."
The servant enters and clears the table after we have finished.
I feel that it is time to plunge into deeper water.
"Is it true that you possess these magical powers?" I
question him, pointedly.
Calmly and confidently, he says: "Yes! Allah, the All-
Powerful, has granted me such powers."
I hesitate. His dark grey eyes gaze fixedly at me.
"You would like me to demonstrate them, I believe?"
he asks, suddenly.
He has correctly gauged my desire. I nod assent.
" Very well. Have you a pencil and some paper?"
I hastily feel in a pocket for my notebook, tear out a page,
and then produce a pencil.
"Good," he remarks. "Now please write some question
on the paper." With that he withdraws and sits at a small
table in the window recess. He half turns his back upon me
and looks down into the street below. Several feet of space
now separate us.
"What kind of question?" I query.
"Anything you wish," he replies promptly.
My brain plays with a few thoughts. Finally, I write down
a brief question. It is: "Where did I live four years ago?"
"Now fold the paper repeatedly until it forms a tiny square,"
he instructs me. "Let it be the smallest possible fold."
I obey him. Thereupon he draws his chair back to my table
and faces me once again.
"Please clench the piece of paper, together with the pencil,
in the palm of your right hand."
I hold the articles tightly clutched. The Egyptian closes
his eyes. He appears to fall into a profound concentration.
Then the heavy lids open once more, the grey eyes look
steadily at me, and he quietly says:
"The question which you asked - was it not, 'Where did
I live four years ago?' "
"You are correct," I reply, astonished. This is a case of
mind reading extraordinary!\n--- 第40页 ---\n38 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
"Now, please unfold the piece of paper in your hand," his
voice breaks in.
I place the tiny scrap upon the surface of the table and
slowly open out its many folds until the paper lies flat, extended
to its original size.
"Examine it!" commands the other man. I do so and make
a surprising discovery. For some unseen hand has written in
pencil the name of the town where I lived four years ago. The
answer has been placed immediately beneath the written
question.
Mahmoud Bey smiles triumphantly.
"There is the answer. Is it correct?" he demands.
I give a wondering assent, for I am baffled. The feat hardly
seems credible. As a test, I ask him to repeat it. He readily
agrees and moves away to the window while I write down a
further question. Thus he avoids any possible accusation of
being close enough to read my writing. Besides, I watch him
carefully and note that his eyes are set upon the colourful scene
in the street below.
Once again I fold the paper and clutch it tightly against the
pencil which is in my hand. He returns to the table and
plunges again into close concentration, his eyes fast shut.
Then come the words :
"Your second question - 'What journal did I edit two years
ago?' "
He has given my query quite accurately. Thought-reading
again, I presume.
Once more he requests me to unfold the tiny scrap in my
right hand. I place it flat on the table and it reveals to my
astounded gaze the name of the journal in question, clumsily
written in pencil!
Conjuring? I dismiss the suggestion as absurd. The paper
and pencil were supplied from my own pockets, the questions
were unpremeditated, while Mahmoud Bey has scrupulously
put several feet between us at each writing. Moreover, the
entire feat has been performed in the morning daylight.
Hypnotism? I have studied the subject and know well
when any attempt at undue influence is being made. I know
equally how to guard against it. And the mysteriously added
words still remain on the paper.1
1 The scrap of paper remained in my possession for several
months, and the writing did not disappear during the whole of that
time. I showed it to two or three persons who readily identified the
added answers. It is therefore evident that the experience had not
been a hallucination.\n--- 第41页 ---\nA MAGICIAN OUT OF EGYPT 39
I am baffled again. For a third time I request the Egyptian
to repeat the experiment, and he agrees to a final test. From
this, too, he emerges completely successful.
The facts cannot be gainsaid. He has read my mind (as
I believe); he has somehow, by some inexplicable magic,
caused certain words to be written by an invisible hand upon a
piece of paper which I clutch tightly in my hand; and, finally,
those words form correct replies to my question.
What is the strange process he uses?
As I ponder over the matter, I feel the presence of uncanny
forces. To the normal mind, the thing is incredible. It is
something alien and apart from sane existence. My heart
almost stands still with a sense of eeriness.
"Have you men in England who can do this?" he asks,
half boastfully.
I am compelled to admit that I know of none who can
perform the feat under similar test conditions, though several
professional conjurers can doubtless perform it if allowed to
use their own paraphernalia.
"Would you care to explain your methods?" I inquire
weakly, fearing that in asking him to reveal his secrets I am
asking for the moon.
He shrugs his broad shoulders.
"I have been offered large sums of money to give my
secrets away, but I do not intend to do so yet."
"You are aware that I am not entirely ignorant of the
psychic side of things?" I venture.
"Assuredly. If I ever come to Europe - which is quite
possible - you may be able to render certain services to me.
In that case, I promise to train you in my methods so that you
could do the same things, if you wish."
"How long does the training last?"
"That would differ with different persons. If you
worked hard and gave the whole of your time to it,
three months would be enough to get an understanding
of the methods, but after that years of practice may be
required."
"Can you not explain the broad basis of your feats, the
theoretical side alone, without explaining your secrets?" I
persist.
Mahmoud Bey muses over my query for a while.
"Yes, I am willing to do that for you," he answers softly.
I feel for my shorthand book, draw it out of a pocket, and
poise the pencil in readiness to take notes.\n--- 第42页 ---\n40 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
"No, please. Not this morning," he protests, smiling.
"I am busy; you must excuse me now. Come here to-morrow
at one hour before noon, and we shall continue our talk."
§
Precisely at the appointed time I sit again in Mahmoud
Bey's room. He pushes a box of Egyptian cigarettes over the
table towards me. I pick one out and, as he proffers the light,
he remarks:
"These come from my native country. They are good."
We lean back in our chairs, puffing a few preliminary whiffs.
The smoke is fragrant, aromatic; certainly these cigarettes
are excellent indeed.
"So I must now describe my theories, as your English
friends would call them; to me they are certainties." Mah
moud Bey laughs good-naturedly. " Perhaps you will be
surprised to hear that I am a man expert in scientific agriculture
and that I hold diplomas in the subject? " he adds irrelevantly.
I begin to scribble a note.
"That does not seem to fit in with my - shall we say,
interest in magic, I know," he continues. I look up at him and
notice a smile hovering around his lips. He gazes back at me.
There is a good "story" in this man, I reflect.
"But you are a journalist; probably you would like to know
how I became a magician, eh?" he queries.
I express an eager assent.
"Good! I was born in an interior province, but brought up
in Cairo. Let me tell you that I was just a normal boy, with
the usual interests which schoolboys possess. I was very keen
on making agriculture my profession, so I attended the Govern
ment Agricultural College for that purpose. I worked hard at
my studies and went on with them most enthusiastically.
"One day an old man took an apartment in the house
where I lived. He was a Jew, with bushy eyebrows and a long
grey beard, and his face was always grave and serious. He
seemed to be living in the past century, for he wore very old-
fashioned clothes. His manner was so reserved that the other
inhabitants of the house were kept at a distance. Strangely
enough, instead of having the same effect upon me, this
mysterious reserve piqued my interest. Being young, self-
assertive and utterly without a trace of shyness, I persistently
strove to make his acquaintance. At first he rebuffed me, but\n--- 第43页 ---\nA MAGICIAN OUT OF EGYPT 41
that only added fuel to the fire of my curiosity. Eventually,
he gave way to my constant attempts to engage him in con
versation. He opened his doors to me and permitted me to
enter his life. Thus I came to learn that he spent much of his
time in strange studies and weird practices. In short, he
confessed to me that he was making researches into the super
natural side of things.
"Imagine it! Hitherto my life had run along the even
channel of youthful study and healthy sport. Now, I was
forced abruptly face to face with a totally different kind of
existence. And it appealed to me. The thought of the super
natural did not frighten me, as no doubt it would have done
other boys. Really, it thrilled me because I saw the possi
bilities of great adventures opening up through it. I begged
the old Jew to teach me something about the subject, and he
yielded to my desire. In this way I was brought into a new
circle of interests and friends. The Jew took me with him to
a society in Cairo which conducted practical investigations,
into magic, spiritualism, theosophy and the occult. He often
delivered lectures to them. The group was composed of
society people, learned savants, Government officials and other
persons of good standing.
"Although I had only just reached manhood, I was permitted
to accompany the old man to every meeting of the society. On
each occasion I listened eagerly; my ears drank in every word
of the talk around me; my eyes watched with keen fascination
the strange experiments which were so often made. Of course,
it was inevitable that my technical studies in agriculture were
neglected, so that more time could be given to the researches
into supernatural matters. However, I had a natural genius
for the former studies and scraped through my diploma
examinations without difficulty.
"I studied the musty old books which the Jew lent me, and
practised the magical rituals and other exercises which he
taught me. I made such quick progress that I began to
discover things which he himself did not know. At length, I
became acknowledged as an expert in these arts. I delivered
lectures and gave demonstrations to the Cairo Society, until its
members appointed me as its President. For twelve years I
remained its leader. Then I resigned, because I wanted to
leave Egypt and travel to certain countries - and, incidentally, to
acquire a fortune!''
Mahmoud Bey stops speaking; his carefully manicured fingers,
which I have not failed to observe, flick the ash from his cigarette.\n--- 第44页 ---\n42 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
"A difficult task!"
He smiles. "For me it will be easy. I need only a few
clients among the super-rich who wish to make use of my
magical powers. Already I am known to certain wealthy
Parsees and rich Hindus. They come here to consult me
about their problems or troubles, or they wish to discover
certain things which elude them, or they want information
which is only to be procured by occult means. I charge them
high fees, naturally. One hundred rupees is my minimum.
Frankly, I want to make a lot of money and then throw the
whole thing up and retire to some quiet interior province in
Egypt. I will buy a large orange-grove plantation and take up
my agricultural work once again."
"Did you come here direct from Egypt "
"No - I spent some time in Syria and Palestine, after leaving
Cairo. The Syrian police officers heard of my powers and
occasionally asked me to help them. Whenever they were
puzzled by some crime, they used my services as a last resource.
Almost always I succeeded in finding the criminal for them."
"How were you able to do that?"
"The inner secrets of the crimes were revealed to me by my
attendant spirits, who created a vision of the scenes before my
eyes."
Mahmoud Bey relapses for a minute into reminiscent
thought. I wait patiently for his next words.
"Yes, I suppose you could call me a practising Spiritualist
of a sort, since I do invoke the aid of spirits," he goes on.
"But I am also what you call a magician in the real sense - not
a conjurer - as well as a thought reader. I do not claim to be
anything more than this."
His claim is sufficiently startling to require no further
additions!
"Please tell me something about your invisible employees,"
I ask him.
"The spirits? Well, it took me three years of difficult
practice to get my present control of them. You see, in the
other world which exists outside our material senses, there are
bad as well as good spirits. I try to use good spirits only.
Some of them are human beings who have passed through
what the world calls death, but most of my attendants are jinns
- that is, native inhabitants of the spirit world who have never
possessed a human body. Some of them are just like animals,
others are as shrewd as men. There are also evil jinns - we call
them jinns in Egypt and I do not know any suitable English\n--- 第45页 ---\nA MAGICIAN OUT OF EGYPT 43
word for them - who are used by low sorcerers, especially by
the African witch doctors. I refuse to have anything to do with
them. They are dangerous servants and will sometimes turn
treacherously on the man who is using them and kill him."
" Who are these human spirits you employ?"
"I can tell you that one of them is my own brother. He
'died' some years ago. But remember - I am not a Spiritualist
medium, for no spirit ever enters my body or is allowed to
control me in any way. My brother communicates with me by
impressing upon my mind whatever thought he wishes, or by
bringing a picture-vision before my mind's eye. That is how
I knew the questions you wrote down yesterday."
"And the jinns?"
"I have as many as thirty at my command. Even after
obtaining mastery over them, I had to train them how to do my
bidding, just as you train children to dance. I have to know
the name of each one, because you cannot bring or use them
without knowing their names. Some of these names I learned
from the musty old books which the Jew lent me."
Mahmoud Bey pushes the cigarette-box towards me again,
and then continues:
"I have given each spirit a particular duty; each one is
trained to do a separate work. Thus, the jinns who produced
the pencil-written words on your piece of paper yesterday
would be quite unable to help me discover the nature of your
questions."
"How do you get into contact with these spirits?" is my
next query.
"I can call them to me very quickly merely by concentrating
in thought upon them, but in practice I usually write down in
Arabic the name of the spirit required; that is sufficient to
bring it to me almost at once."
The Egyptian looks at his watch. He rises and says:
"And now, my friend, I regret to say that I cannot give you
any further explanation of my methods. Perhaps you will now
understand why I must keep them secret. We may meet again
one day, if Allah wills. Good-bye."
He flashes his teeth in a smile as he bows. The interview is
at an end.
§
Night in Bombay. I go to bed late, but not to sleep. The
heavy air suffocates me; it seems to contain no oxygen; and\n--- 第46页 ---\n44 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
its heat is intolerable. The whirring blades of an electric fan
which hangs from the ceiling bring little relief, certainly not
sufficient to induce my weary eyes to close. I find that the
simple act of breathing is a distinct labour. The air is hot
enough to hurt my inexperienced lungs with every dilation.
My wretched body becomes flaccid and drips a continuous
stream of perspiration which my pyjamas soak up. Worse, my
oppressed brain finds no rest. The devil of insomnia enters
my life this night and is destined to haunt me until the day when
my shoes tread Indian soil for the last time. I have begun to
pay the inevitable price of acclimatization to the tropical world.
A mosquito net hangs around my bed like a white shroud.
Through a tall window which opens on the veranda balcony
the moonlight comes streaming and casts eerie shadows on the
pale ceiling.
Musing over the morning's talk with Mahmoud Bey and the
astounding phenomena of the previous day, I seek for some
explanation other than that he has given me, but can find none.
If those thirty or more mysterious servitors of his really exist,
then one is back in the medieval period when - assuming legend
does not always lie - magicians flourished in every city of Europe,
though often hindered in their dark work by Church and State.
The more I seek for an explanation, the more I retreat
baffled.
Why had Mahmoud Bey instructed me to hold the pencil
simultaneously with the piece of paper? Did his alleged spirits
draw some constituent atoms from the lead to enable them to
write the answers?
I cast about in memory for instances of similar feats. Does
not the famous Venetian voyager, Marco Polo, relate somewhere
in his book of travel how he came across certain magicians in
China, Tartary and Tibet and how they were able to perform
pencil writing without contact? And did not those wizards
inform him that this weird art was known and practised among
their people since centuries before?
I remember, too, that Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, the enig
matic Russian lady who founded the Theosophical Society,
produced somewhat parallel phenomena fifty years ago.
Certain favoured members of her society received somewhat
lengthy messages through her agency. They propounded
philosophical questions and the replies were scrawled -
precipitated, she called it - upon the actual letter paper bearing
the questions! It is curious that Mme Blavatsky claimed
intimate acquaintance with both Tartary and Tibet, the very\n--- 第47页 ---\nA MAGICIAN OUT OF EGYPT 45
lands where Marco Polo met with the same phenomena. Yet
Mme Blavatsky did not claim to control any mysterious
spirits, as Mahmoud Bey had done. Her assertion was that the
mysterious writings emanated from her Tibetan masters, who
lived in the flesh and lurked unseen as the inspirers of her
society. Apparently they were better hands at the feat than
the Egyptian, for they produced such writings hundreds of
miles away from Tibet. There had been much dispute at the
time whether the Russian lady's phenomena were really
genuine, and whether her Tibetan teachers really existed.
But that is not my concern, for that brilliant woman has long
since gone to the other world in which she seemed so much at
home while yet here. I know my own experience and what
I have witnessed with my own eyes. I must accept the genuine
ness of the performance, even if I reserve its explanation.
Yes, Mahmoud Bey is a magician, a twentieth-century wizard.
My discovery of him so soon after landing on Indian earth
seems to be a herald, apt and prophetic, of even stranger
discoveries yet. Metaphorically, I have cut the first notch in
my stick of Indian experience. Actually, I have put down the
first note on the virgin white sheets of my note-book.\n--- 第48页 ---\nCHAPTER IV
I MEET A MESSIAH
"I AM pleased to see you" is the somewhat conventional
greeting with which I am received by Meher Baba. He
is destined, had I but known it, to flash like a meteorite
across the Western sky and to rouse the curiosity of millions of
people in Europe and America. Moreover, like a meteorite, he
will fall ingloriously to earth. I am the first Western journalist
to interview him, for I track him down to his Indian abode
when he is almost unknown to more than local fame.
I have become acquainted with one of his chief disciples,
and, after some correspondence, wonder what manner of man
has joined the ranks of self-appointed deliverers of mankind.
Two Parsee disciples come to Bombay to escort me. Before we
leave the city, they inform me that it is necessary to make a
present of choice flowers and fruits to their master. So we
proceed to the bazaar and they collect a large hamper of these
commodities on my behalf.
Our train arrives at Ahmednagar next morning, after travel
ling through the night. I remember it as the historical place
where the cruel Emperor Aurungzeeb, Preserver of the Faith
and Ornament of the Moghul Throne, stroked his heavy beard
for the last time, for Death caught him here in his tent.
A rackety old war-time Ford car, which does duty for the
transport needs of Meher Baba's retreat, waits for us at the
station. The seven-mile run which follows takes us through
flat country. An avenue of neem trees lines part of the road.
We pass a village whose huddled brown roofs rise against the
elaborate little spire of the local temple. Then I sight a stream,
whose banks are lined with pink and yellow flowers, and in
whose muddy water buffaloes are blissfully resting.
We arrive at Meher Baba's curious colony, which is spread
out in scattered erections. Three odd-looking stone structures,
which I learn later are the remnants of a dismantled army camp
site, stand in a field. Three plain wooden bungalows stand in
46\n--- 第49页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 47
an adjacent one. A quarter of a mile away is a little village whose
name is given as Arangaon. The whole place presents a bare
appearance and seems half deserted. My Parsee escorts are at
pains to inform me that this is only the country headquarters of
their master, and that his principal centre is near the town of
Nasik, where the majority of his intimate disciples reside and
where visitors are usually received.
A few men emerge from one of the bungalows as we pass.
They lounge on the veranda, smile, gesticulate, and seem
pleased at the arrival of a European in their midst. We cross
a field and reach a queer-looking structure, which is nothing
less than an artificial cave. It is built of stones and rubble
cemented together and is about eight feet deep. It faces due
south and receives the bright morning sunlight full into its
interior. I look around and see the rolling expanse of fields,
the ring of hills which bounds the horizon on the east, and the
tree-shaded village down in a hollow. This Parsee holy man
is doubtless a great lover of Nature, for he has set his retreat
in a scene of aloof, untroubled peace. I am, indeed, glad to
find such a quiet backwater after the whirl of Bombay life.
Two men stand on guard like sentries outside the cave's
entrance. They move at our approach and go inside to consult
their master. "Put out your cigarette," whispers one of my
escorts, "Baba does not like smoking." I throw the offending
cigarette away. A minute later I an: conducted into the august
presence of the so-called "new messiah."
He squats at the far end of the cave, the entire floor of which
is covered with a beautifully patterned Persian rug. He proves
to be somewhat different from the person I have imagined. His
eyes do not penetrate me, his facial expression lacks strength,
and although I am aware of something ascetic, unworldly and
gentle in his atmosphere, I wonder why I feel no responsive
thrill, such as one may reasonably expect to feel in the presence
of one who proposes to win the allegiance of millions of
people.
He is clothed in a long, spotless white robe, which looks
ludicrously like an old-fashioned English nightshirt! His
amiable and kindly face is framed in chestnut-coloured hair,
which falls in long curly waves to his neck. I am struck by the
soft, silky texture of the hair, which is remarkably like the hair
of a woman. His nose rises into arched prominence and then
descends into aquiline depth. The eyes are dark, medium
sized and clear, but I find them unimpressive. A heavy brown
moustache stretches across his upper lip. The light-tinted\n--- 第50页 ---\n48 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
olive skin betrays his Persian origin, for his father hails from
the land of the Shahs. Withal he is young, apparently some
where in the thirties. A final feature which remains in memory
is his forehead. It is so low as to appear less than average
height, and it is so receding as to make me wonder. Do brain
areas carry qualitative significance? Does a man's forehead
indicate his powers of thought? But possibly a messiah is
above such physical limitations!
"I am pleased to see you," he remarks, but not, mind you,
in the usual manner of human speech. For he holds a small
alphabet board upon his lap and points rapidly with his index
finger to one letter after another. As the words are spelt out
in this dumb pantomime manner, his secretary interprets them
aloud for my benefit.
Since the tenth of July, 1925, the holy man has not
uttered a single word. His younger brother tells me that
when the new messiah breaks into speech, his message will
startle the world! Meanwhile, he adopts a pose of strict
silence.
Still fingering the board, Meher Baba makes some kindly
inquiries into my personal well-being, asks questions about my
life, and expresses his gratification at my interest in India.
He possesses an excellent knowledge of English, so there is no
necessity to translate my speech. He postpones till the late
afternoon the lengthy interview which I request. "Food and
rest are your immediate needs," he says, or rather,
communicates.
I adjourn to one of the stone structures. It possesses a
bare gloomy interior, but contains an old bedstead without
bedding, a ramshackle table and a chair which might have
rendered good service during the Indian Mutiny. Here I am
to make my home for nearly a week. I peer through the
glassless window and am rewarded by a view of sparse,
untilled fields stretching away into scrub bush dotted with
cactus.
Four hours creep lethargically around my watch. Once
again I sit upon the Persian rug, face to face with Meher Baba,
whose colossal claim that he is destined to give spiritual light
and practical leading to the whole of mankind, I have yet to
investigate.
He puts this claim into the first sentence which he flicks out
on the alphabet board.
"I shall change the history of the whole world I"
My note-taking disturbs him, however.\n--- 第51页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 49
"Can you not make your notes after you leave me?"
I agree, and henceforth inscribe his words upon the pages
of memory.
"As Jesus came to impart spirituality to a materialistic age,
so have I come to impart a spiritual push to present-day
mankind. There is always a fixed time for such divine work
ings, and when the hour is ripe I shall reveal my true nature
to the entire world. The great teachers of religion - Jesus,
Buddha, Muhammed and Zoroaster - do not differ in their
essential doctrines. All these prophets came from God. The
chief commandments run through all their teachings like a
golden thread. These divine ones came out into public
when their help was most needed, when spirituality was at
its lowest ebb and materialism was apparently everywhere
victorious. Such a time we are fast approaching at present.
The whole world is now enmeshed in sensual desires, in racial
selfishness and money worship. God is forsaken. True
religion is abused; man seeks life and the priests usually give
him a stone. God, therefore, must send his true prophet
among men once again to establish true worship and to awaken
people out of their materialistic stupor. I but follow in the
line of those earlier prophets; this is my mission. God has
given me a mandate."
I listen quietly while the secretary voices these amazing
assertions. I keep my mind open, uncritical, and offer no
mental resistance. This is not to say that I accept them,
however, but that I am aware one must know how to listen
among these Orientals. Otherwise a Westerner will get little
for his pains, even where there might be something worthy of
acceptance. Truth can stand a ruthless investigation, but the
methods of the Occident must be modified to suit the mental
atmosphere of the Orient.
Meher Baba smiles genially at me, and then proceeds:
"The prophets lay down certain rules and regulations to
help the masses lead better lives and to incline them towards
God. Gradually these rules become the tenets of an organized
religion, but the idealistic spirit and motive force which prevail
during the founder's lifetime, disappear gradually after his
death. That is why organizations cannot bring spiritual truth
nearer and why true religion is always a personal concern.
Religious organizations become like archaeological departments
trying to resuscitate the past. Therefore I shall not attempt
to establish any new religion, cult or organization. But I shall
rejuvenate the religious thought of all peoples, instil a higher\n--- 第52页 ---\n50 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
understanding of life into them. Dogmas invented centuries
after the founder's death, frequently differ startlingly, but the
fundamentals of all religions are really the same, because all
issue from the same source - God. Therefore, when I appear
publicly I shall run down no existing religion, but then I shall
not uphold any special one. I want to turn men's minds away
from sectarian differences, so that they will agree on essential
truths. Remember though, that every prophet considers the
times, the circumstances and the prevailing mentality of
the people before his public manifestation. He therefore
preaches doctrines best understood and best suited to such
conditions."
Meher Baba pauses for a while to let these exalted ideas soak
into my head, and then his words take a new turn.
"Have you not noticed how all the nations have been
brought into quick communication with each other during this
modern epoch? Do you not see how railways, steamships,
telephones, cables, wireless and newspapers have caused the
whole world to become a closely-woven unit? An important
event which happens in one country is made known within a
day to the people of a country ten thousand miles away. There
fore a man who wishes to deliver an important message can
find almost the whole of mankind as a ready audience. For all
that there is a sound reason. The time is soon coming to
give mankind a universal spiritual belief which shall serve
all races of people and all countries. In other words, the
way is being prepared to enable me to deliver a world-wide
message!"
This breath-taking announcement indicates sufficiently that
Meher Baba possesses an unlimited faith in his own future, and
indeed, his whole manner confirms it. In his own estimation,
his stock will one day stand at infinitely more than par!
"But when shall you tell the world about your mission?"
I ask.
"I shall break my silence and deliver my message only
when there is chaos and confusion everywhere, for then I shall
be most needed; when the world is rocking in upheavals -
earthquakes, floods and volcanic eruptions; when both East
and West are aflame with war. Truly the whole world must
suffer, for the whole world must be redeemed."
"Do you know the date of this war?"
"Yes. It is not far off. But I do not wish to reveal the
date."1
1 See also Chapter XIV.\n--- 第53页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 51
"That is a terrible prophecy!" I exclaim.
Meher Baba spreads out his thin tapering fingers
apologetically.
"It is. The war will be terrible in its nature because
scientific ingenuity will make it more intense than the last
war. However, it will last only a short time - a few months -
and at its worst I shall make myself publicly known and
declare my mission to the entire world. By my material
efforts and spiritual powers, I shall speedily bring the conflict
to an abrupt end, thus restoring peace to all the nations. Yet
great natural changes must take place on this planet simul
taneously. Life and property in different parts of the globe
will suffer. If I play the role of a messiah it will be because
world conditions require it. Be assured that I shall not leave
my spiritual work undone."
His secretary, a short dusky-faced man who wears the round
black cap of the Mahratta people, looks at me impressively
after he finishes speaking the last word. The expression on his
face seems to say: "There! how do you like that! You see
what important things we know here!"
His master's fingers begin to move over the board once more,
and he hastens to tell me their new import.
"After the war will come a long era of unique peace, a time
of world tranquillity. Disarmament will then no longer be a
matter of mere talk, but an actual fact. Racial and communal
strife will cease; sectarian hatred between religious organi
zations will come to an end. I shall travel widely throughout
the world and the nations will be eager to see me. My spiritual
message will reach every land, every town, every village even.
Universal brotherhood; peace among men; sympathy for
the poor and downtrodden; love of God - I shall promote
these things."
"What of India - your own country?"
"In India I shall not rest till the pernicious caste system is
uprooted and destroyed. India became depressed in the scale
of nations with the establishment of caste. When the out-
castes and lower castes are elevated, India will find herself to
be one of the influential countries of the world."
"And what of her future?"
"Despite its faults, India is still the most spiritual country
in the world. The future will find it the moral leader of all the
nations. All the great founders of religions were born in the
East, and it is to the East that the peoples must continue to look
for spiritual light."\n--- 第54页 ---\n52 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
I try to visualize the great Western nations sitting at the feet
of the meek little brown men, but fail. Perhaps the white-robed
figure squatting in front of me grasps my difficulty, for he adds:
"The so-called subjection of India is not real subjection.
It is of the body, and therefore temporary. The soul of the
country is deathless and great, even if outwardly the nation
has lost its power."
This subtle explanation somewhat eludes my understanding.
I return to our earlier theme.
"We in the West have heard most of the things in your
message from other sources. You have nothing new to tell
us, then?"
"My words can only echo the old spiritual truths, but it is
my mystic power that will bring a new element into the world's
life."
Upon this point I seek to rest my brain. For a while there is
silence; I ask no more questions. I turn my head and gaze
out of the cave. Far across the quiet fields, a line of hills rises
in the distance. In the sky, a pitiless sun scorches man, beast
and earth alike. The minutes pass. In this secluded cave, in
this unending heat, surrounded by absorbent minds, it is easy
to weave grandiose schemes of world reformation, to possess
oneself of extravagant religious ideas. But out in the world of
reality, amid the hard life of materialistic cities, these things
would soon dissipate like mists before the dawning sun.
"Europe is hard, sceptical," I remark, turning and looking
at the new messiah. "How are you going to convince us that
you speak with real divine authority? How can you convert
unfamiliar peoples to your brand of spiritual belief? The
average Westerner will tell you that it is impossible, and very
likely he will laugh at you for your pains."
"Ah, you do not realize how changed the times will be."
Meher Baba strokes his pale slender hands. And then he
adds some astounding claims, which sound fantastic to Western
ears, yet his manner is quite matter-of-fact.
"Once I publicly announce myself as a messiah, nothing
will be able to withstand my power. I shall openly work
miracles in proof of my mission at the same time. Restoring
sight to the blind, healing the sick, maimed and crippled, yes,
even raising the dead - these things will be child's play to me!
I shall work these miracles because through them people will
everywhere be forced to believe in me, and then believe in my
message. These wonders will not be done to satisfy idle
curiosity, but to convince the sceptically minded."\n--- 第55页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 53
I hold my breath. The interview has reached the boundary
of common sense. My mind begins to falter. We are entering
the region of Oriental fantasy.
"Make no mistake, however," continues the Parsee messiah.
"I tell my disciples that these miracles are to be done only for
the masses, not for them. I should not care to perform a single
wonder, but I know that this will turn the minds of common
people to my words. If I shall astonish the peoples of the world
with these feats, it will be only because I wish to spiritualize
them."
"Baba has already done marvellous things," breaks in the
secretary.
I am instantly alert.
"Such as ?" I demand quickly.
The master smiles self-deprecatingly.
"Tell him another time, Vishnu," he communicates." I
can perform any miracle when necessary. It is easy to one who
has reached my divine state."
I make a mental note to buttonhole the secretary on the
morrow and get some details of these reputed marvels. They
will form an interesting part of my investigation. I come as a
circumspect inquirer and every kind of fact will make grist for
my mill.
There is another interlude of silence. I request the holy man
to give me certain information about his career.
"Tell him that also, Vishnu," he answers, directing me
again to his secretary. "You will have plenty of opportunity
to talk to my disciples, since you are staying here for a little
while. They can tell you about the past."
The talk drifts into the domain of general matters. Soon
after, our meeting disperses. The first thing I do on getting
back to my quarters is to light a cigarette, thus atoning for the
one forbidden me, and then watch its fragrant smoke rise
erratically upward.
§
I witness a curious spectacle in the early evening. The stars
have just begun to twinkle faintly, the day is not quite dead, and
in this queer half light a few oil lanterns glow palely. Meher
sits inside his cave while a motley crowd, composed of dis
ciples, visitors and people from the nearby village of Arangaon,
gather in horseshoe fashion around the entrance.
A ceremony which is repeated every evening wherever\n--- 第56页 ---\n54 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
Meher may be at the time is about to take place. A devotee
holds aloft a shallow metal bowl which serves as a lamp, its wick
being dipped in oil which is strongly perfumed with sandal
wood. He waves it seven times around the saintly head of his
master. The assembled audience thereupon break into a
vigorous chorus of chants and prayers. Through the in
tonations of their Mahratti dialect, I catch the name of Baba
several times. It is obvious that the chants are hyperboles of
adulation for their master. Everyone looks at him with
adoring eyes. Meher's younger brother sits at a small portable
harmonium, and makes a wailing kind of music to accompany
the singers.
During the course of the ceremony, each devotee files up to
the cave in turn, prostrates himself before Meher and kisses
his uncovered feet. Some are so overwrought with pious
emotion that they prolong the act of osculation to a full minute!
I am told that this act is deemed extremely beneficial spirit
ually, since it brings Meher's blessing upon the devotee and
automatically washes away some of his sins.
I walk back to my quarters, wondering what the next day will
bring forth. Somewhere across the fields and out in the jungle
a jackal bays and breaks the night's silence.
The next day I gather the secretary and some of the English-
speaking disciples outside one of their wooden bungalows. We
sit in a half circle. Those who do not understand English stand
a little distance away and watch us with smiling faces and
interested eyes. I proceed to extract from all these collective
minds and memories such facts about their amazing master's
career as I do not already know.
His personal name is Meher, but he calls himself Sadguru
Meher Baba. Sadguru means "perfect master," while Baba
is simply a term of affection in common use among some of the
Indian peoples, and it is by this name alone that his disciples
usually address him.
Meher Baba's father is a Persian1 who is an adherent of the
Zoroastrian creed, and who emigrated to India as a poor youth.
Meher was his first son and was born in 1894 at Poona City.
The boy was put to school at five, proved good at his studies,
and passed the matriculation examination at seventeen. He then
entered Deccan College in Poona and received a good modern
education for two years.
Now began the tortuous and incomprehensible phase of his
career. He was cycling back from school one evening and was
1 Hence the appellation Parsee.\n--- 第57页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 55
about to pass the dwelling-place of a well-known Muhammedan
woman faqueer. Her name was Hazrat Babajan, and she was
reputed to be over a century old. She was reclining on a long
couch which stood upon a railed veranda outside her humble
wooden one-roomed house. When the cycle drew abreast of
her, the old woman rose and beckoned to the boy. He dis
mounted and approached her. She clasped his hands and
embraced him and then kissed his forehead.
What happened afterwards is not very clear. I gathered that
the youth reached his home in a dazed mental state, and that
during the following eight months his mental faculties pro
gressively weakened until he became unable to study properly.
In the end he had to bid a final farewell to his college, because
he could no longer follow his lessons.
Thereafter young Meher fell into a semi-idiotic condition
and was hardly able to look after himself. His eyes became dull
and lifeless, and he lacked the intelligence to perform the most
elementary duties of a human being, such as taking food, washing
oneself, attending to the calls of nature, and so on. When his
father said, "Eat!" he took his food in a mechanical manner;
otherwise he did not understand why the food was put before
him. In short he became a human automaton.
A young man of twenty, whose parents have to care for him
like a child of three, seems a case of mental regression, and the
distracted father concluded that he had overworked his mind
while cramming for an examination. Meher was taken to
various doctors, who diagnosed mental breakdown and gave
him injections. In nine months' time improvement in his
lamentable condition set in and gradually increased, until he
was able to understand his environment intelligently and to act
more normally.
After his recovery it was discovered that his character had
changed. His scholastic ambitions were gone, his ambitions for
a worldly career had disappeared, while his interest in games
and sports had collapsed. All these things were replaced by a
deep thirst for the religious life and by a continuous aspiration
to spiritualize himself.
Because he believed that these changes took their root in the
kiss which the Mudammedan woman faqueer had bestowed on
him, Meher approached the old lady for advice about his
future. She directed him to find a spiritual teacher. He
inquired where this boon was to be obtained. She waved her
hand vaguely into space for reply.
He visited several holy men of repute in the locality. Then\n--- 第58页 ---\n56 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
he went farther afield to the villages within a hundred miles of
his native Poona. One day he walked into a little stone-built
temple near Sakori. It was a poor humble shrine but it was the
abode of a very holy man, or so the villagers said. And so, when
Meher came face to face with Upasani Maharaj, he felt that he
had found his master.
The young aspirant for holiness made periodic excursions
from home to Sakori. He usually spent a few days at a time
with his teacher, but once he remained for four months. Meher
asserts that during this period he was being perfected, made
ready for his mission. One evening he collected thirty of his old
schoolmates and boyhood friends, gave them mysterious hints
of an important meeting, and brought them to the little temple
in Sakori. The doors were locked and Upasani Maharaj, the
stern-looking holy man who lived there, rose and addressed the
gathering. He spoke to them about religion, told them to seek
virtue, informed them that he had made Meher the spiritual
inheritor of his own mystic powers and knowledge, and finally
announced to the surprised young men that Meher had
attained divine perfection! He strongly advised them to
become followers of their Parsee friend, for then they would
receive great spiritual benefit, both in this life and in that to
come.
Some of his listeners took his advice and others remained
sceptical. About a year later, when Meher had reached the age
of twenty-seven, the young Parsee announced to his small
flock that he had become conscious of a divine mission which
he was to carry out, and that God had given him a work of
colossal importance to mankind. He did not straightway reveal
the precise nature of that mission, but within a few years he let
the secret emerge. He was destined to become a messiah!
In 1924 Meher left India for the first time. He embarked on
a journey to Persia with a company of half a dozen disciples,
telling them that he would tour the country of his ancestors.
When the ship touched port at Bushire, he suddenly changed
his mind and left the place by the next homeward boat. Three
months later rebel forces captured Teheran, the Persian capital
and deposed the old regime. A new Shah came to the throne.
Meher Baba then turned to his followers and said:
"Now you see the result of my mystic workings during my
visit to Persia!"
His disciples told me that Persia was a happier land under the
new ruler, and that Muhammedans, Zoroastrians, Jews and
Christians were living amicably together, whereas there had\n--- 第59页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 57
been constant strife and cruel outrages among them under the
old regime.
Some years after this mysterious excursion, Meher Baba
began a curious educational institution. At his suggestion a
disciple purchased the colony's present site near the village of
Arangaon. Several rough bungalows were constructed, to
gether with many thatch-and-pole huts. A free boarding school
was then declared open, the teachers being recruited from the
Parsee's educated disciples and the pupils from the families of
devotees or their friends. No fees were charged for tuition,
while even board and lodging were free. In addition to the
usual secular subjects, there was special instruction in un
denominational religion by Meher himself.
On such attractive terms it was an easy matter to collect
nearly one hundred boys. A dozen of them arrived from dis
tant Persia. The boys were taught the moral ideals which are
more or less common to most religions, and the life stories of
the great prophets were unfolded to them. The class on
religion gradually became the central feature of the curriculum
and Meher Baba led the older boys into a devotional mysticism
which appears to have been of a somewhat watery nature.
They were taught to regard him as a sacred personage, even to
worship him. A few boys began to manifest signs of religious
hysteria in the sequence. Strange scenes occurred among
them every few days.
A noticeable feature of this unusual school was that the pupils
belonged to varying castes, races and creeds. Hindus
Muhammedans, Indian Christians and Zoroastrians mingled
freely, but Meher Baba wanted a still wider enrolment. He sent
his chief disciple on a mission to England to find a few white
pupils. The emissary, however, encountered much difficulty
because the white parents were unwilling to entrust their
children to a stranger, who wanted to haul the latter off to a
school in distant Asia. Moreover, the idea of a school com
bining all religions did not mean much to them. There are
plenty of schools in England where pupils of different creeds
foregather in a natural spontaneous manner without the fuss
that is made of it in a creed-ridden country like India.
One day the emissary from India met an Englishman who
straightaway became converted to acceptance of the Parsee
messiah after a conversation or two. The man was possessed
of an enthusiastic temperament and having rapidly travelled
through all the cults which honeycomb London, he was ready
for what seemed to be the loftier message of Meher Baba. So\n--- 第60页 ---\n58 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
he assisted in the quest for white pupils and found three
children, whose poverty-stricken parents were willing to ease
their own burdens at the price of parting with them. At this
stage the India Office bestirred itself into activity, investigated
the matter, shook its official head and put a ban on the project.
The children did not sail. The representative of the Parsee
messiah returned to India, accompanied by the Englishman
and the latter's wife and sister-in-law. Five or six months
after their arrival, Meher Baba sent them back to England at
the expense of his chief disciple.
I learnt from Meher that his object in founding this school
was twofold. First, he wanted to break down the racial and
religious barriers among the pupils; secondly, he sought to
train a selected number of them as future ambassadors for his
spiritual cause. When the years had sufficiently ripened them
and the time came for public announcement of his own mission,
he would send them out to all the five continents to act as
apostles and helpers in his destined work of spiritualising
mankind.
Another activity developed into being alongside the school.
A primitive hospital was opened and ardent disciples were sent
out to collect the blind, the ailing and the crippled from the
locality. The latter were given free medical treatment, food
and accommodation, while the Parsee holy man provided them
with spiritual consolation. Five lepers were cured by his mere
touch, says an enthusiastic devotee. Alas, I am a trifle sceptical,
for no one knows who they are, where they are or how to find
them now. 'Tis a piece of Oriental exaggeration, I fear.
Surely one of the lepers would have attached himself to Meher
Baba's train of disciples in sheer gratitude. Surely the news
would have spread like a prairie fire across leprosy-ridden
India, and all the stricken souls of the country would have
eagerly flocked to the hospital near Arangaon.
There grew up a large camp-following of devotees, visitors
and hangers-on from nearby villages. The population of this
unusual colony reached into hundreds; intense religious
fervour pervaded the whole place; and Meher Baba was, of
course, the centre of the whole picture.
Eighteen months after the colony was founded, it was
suddenly closed down and all these activities were abandoned.
The boys were sent back to their parents and the patients to
their homes. Meher Baba vouchsafed no reason for this move
on his part. I learnt that sudden inexplicable impulses of this
kind were a regular feature of his conduct.\n--- 第61页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 59
In the spring of 1929 he sent out his first missionary disciple,
a man named Sadhu Leik, who was bidden to go on tour round
India. The latter was told as a parting injunction:
"You have the advantage of a messiah to work for. Be
cosmopolitan and do not run down any religion. Be sure
that I will know all about you. Do not be disheartened
by the remarks of others. I will lead you, and follow none
but me."
From the information which I picked up it was obvious that
the poor fellow was physically unfitted for a wandering life.
He was able to create a small following in Madras, but soon
sickened on the way and then returned to die.
Such is a rapid outline of the Parsee holy man's career.
§
I have had several fugitive talks of a chatty nature with
Meher Baba, but I want to hear something more definite about
his self-appointed mission to the world. So I seek and obtain
my final interview with him.
He wears a soft blue scarf to-day and the alphabet board
rests upon his knees in readiness for our conversation. The
disciples present form an admiring audience and provide the
requisite background. Everyone smiles at everyone else until
I shoot a sudden question through the silence.
"How do you know that you are a messiah?"
The disciples look aghast at my temerity. The master
moves his bushy eyebrows. But he is not disconcerted, for he
smiles at the enquiring Westerner and quickly answers:
"I know! I know it so well. You know that you are a
human being, and so I know that I am a messiah! It is my
whole life. My bliss never stops. You never mistake yourself
for some other person; so I cannot mistake who I am. I have
a divine work to do and I will do it."
"What really happened when the Muhammedan woman
faqueer kissed you. Can you remember?"
"Yes. Until then I was as worldly as other youths. Hazrat
Babajan unlocked the door for me. Her kiss was the turning
point. I felt as though the universe was receding into space;
and I was left entirely alone. Yes - I was alone with God. For
months I could not sleep. And yet I grew no weaker but
remained as strong as before. My father did not understand;
he thought I was going mad. He called in one doctor and then\n--- 第62页 ---\n60 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
another. They gave me medicines and tried injections, but
they were all wrong. I was with God and there was nothing
to cure. Only, I had lost hold of normal existence and it took
me a long time to get back. Do you understand?"
"Quite. Now that you have got back, when will you let the
public know?"
"My manifestation will happen in the near future, but I
cannot give you the exact date."
"And then - ?"
"My task on this earth will last for thirty-three years.
Afterwards I shall undergo a tragic death. My own people, the
Parsees, will be responsible for my violent end. But others will
continue my work."
"Your disciples, I presume?"
"My circle of twelve selected disciples, of whom one will
become a master at the appointed time. It is for their sake
that I fast often and observe silence, for this wipes their sins
away and will enable them to become perfect spiritually.
They have all been with me in past births, and I am bound to
help them. There will also be an outer circle with forty-four
members. They will be men and women of lower spiritual
grade; their duty will be to assist the twelve chief disciples,
after the latter have attained perfection."
"There are other claimants to messiahship?"
Meher laughs in deprecation of those absurd persons.
"Yes. There is Krishnamurti - Mrs. Besant's protege.
The Theosophists deceive themselves. Their chief wire-pullers
are supposed to be somewhere on the Himalayas in Tibet.
You will find nothing but dust and stones in their supposed
abodes. Besides, no real spiritual teacher ever required
someone else's body to be prepared and trained for his use.
That is ridiculous."
Other strange statements emerge from this final conversa
tion; a curious jumble of assertions, which come through
slim fingers flickering from letter to letter. . . ." America
has a great future; she will become a spiritually-minded
nation. . .. I am aware of everyone who puts his faith in
me, and he is always helped. . . . Do not try to read my
actions, you will never fathom them. . . . Once I visit a
place and stay there, however short a time, its spiritual atmo
sphere becomes greatly elevated. . . . The general spiritual
push that I shall give the world will soon put right all material
problems - economic, political, sexual, sociological - for selfish
ness will be destroyed and brotherhood will replace it. . . .\n--- 第63页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 61
Shivaji, the chieftain who built up the Mahratta empire in
the seventeenth century, is also here (he points to himself;
the meaning is that Meher is a reincarnation of Shivaji). . . .
Some of the planets are inhabited; they resemble this globe
in culture and material advancement, but spiritually our earth
is most advanced. ..."
One observes that Meher suffers from no modesty when
discussing his claims. I am a little startled, however, when he
communicates a command to me at the finish of the interview.
"Go to the West as my representative! Spread my name
as that of the coming divine messenger. Work for me and my
influence, and you will then be working for the good of
mankind."
"The world will probably scout me as a madman," I reply
uneasily, for such a task staggers my imagination.
Meher disagrees.
I answer that nothing short of working a series of miracles
will convince the West that anyone is a spiritual superman,
let alone a messiah, and that since I cannot perform miracles
I cannot undertake the job of being his herald.
"Then you shall perform them!" is his comforting
assurance.
I remain silent. Meher misconstrues my silence.
"Stay with me and I shall confer great powers on you," he
urges. "You are very fortunate. I will help you to obtain
advanced powers, so that you will render service in the West."
§
It is unnecessary to describe the remainder of this incredible
interview. Some men are born great, some achieve greatness,
and others appoint a press agent. Meher seems to favour the
latter course.
Next day I prepare to leave. I have imbibed sufficient
pious wisdom and prophetic forebodings to suffice me for the
time. I have not wandered to distant parts of the world
merely to hear religious assertions or declarations of grandeur.
I want facts, even if they are to be facts of a strange, uncommon
kind. And I want reliable evidence; better still, something
personal, something to which I can testify for my own
satisfaction.
My kit is packed, I am about to leave. I go to Meher and
bid him a polite farewell. He informs me that within a few\n--- 第64页 ---\n62 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
months he will be in residence at his central headquarters,
which are situated near the town of Nasik. He suggests that
I should visit him there and stay for a month.
"Do this. Come when you can. I will give you wonderful
spiritual experiences and enable you to know the real truth
about me. You will be shown my inner spiritual powers.
After that, you will have no more doubts. You will be able to
prove by your own personal experiences what I claim. Then
you can go to the West and win many people for me."
I decide to return at my leisure and spend a month with
him. Despite the theatrical character of the Parsee holy man
and the fantastic nature of his mission, I decide to investigate
the whole thing with an open mind.
§
A brief return to the stir of city life in Bombay, and then I
entrain for Poona. My wanderings around this ancient land
are about to begin.
The old Muhammedan holy woman, whose sudden inter
vention started Meher Baba off on his queer tangent, engages
my interest. I deem a short visit to her will not come amiss.
I have already made a few preliminary enquiries about her in
Bombay, where I learn from former Judge Khandalawalla,
who has known her for fifty years, that her age is really about
ninety-five. I remember that Meher's followers informed me
that it is one hundred and thirty, but I generously ascribe this
exaggeration to the heat of their enthusiasm.
The Judge briefly tells me her story. She is a native of
Baluchistan, that vague territory situate between Afghanistan
and India, and she ran away from home quite early. After
long and adventurous wanderings afoot, she arrived at Poona
about the beginning of this century and has never moved
from the city since. At first, she made her home under a
neem tree, where she insisted on remaining in all seasons. Her
reputation for sanctity and strange powers spread throughout
the Muhammedan people in the vicinity, until even the
Hindus came to treat her with due reverence. Some Muham-
medans eventually built a wooden shelter under the tree for
her, since she refused to live in a proper house. This gives her
the semblance of a home and provides some protection against
the inclemencies of the monsoon season.
I ask the Judge for his personal opinion. He replies that he\n--- 第65页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 63
does not doubt but that Hazrat Babajan is a genuine faqueer
The Judge happens to be a Parsee, so I make some judicious
enquiries about Meher Baba, who is well known to him.
What I learn is unlikely to make me more favourable to the
Parsee messiah. I ask him finally about Upasani Maharaj,
who is now the inspirer of Meher. My informant, a shrewd,
discerning old man of vast experience in these and worldly
matters, enters into a lengthy account of his own unfortunate
contact with him. I give two instances:
"Upasani has made ghastly mistakes. He once induced me
to go to Benares, where he was staying at the time. After a
while, I got a premonition of death and wanted to return to
Poona, where my family was living. Upasani prevented me
from going by repeatedly prophesying that everything would
be all right. Nevertheless, two days later I received a telegram
saying that my son's wife had given birth to a child, and that
it died within a few minutes. In the other case, Upasani told
my son-in-law, who was thinking of going on the Bombay
Stock Exchange, that such a move would prove extremely
fortunate for him. Acting on this advice, he embarked on the
Exchange and was almost ruined!"
Judge Khandalawalla impresses me with the independence
of his outlook. He debunks Upasani Maharaj, whom Meher
Baba has described to me as "one of the greatest spiritual
personalities of this age," yet he does not hesitate to admit that
Meher himself is honest and really believes in his spiritual
attainment, although this attainment remains unproven.
I reach Poona, put up at a hotel in the cantonment, and then
drive straight to the abode of Hazrat Babajan. A guide, who
knows her personally and who will eke out my little Hindustani
as an interpreter, accompanies me.
We find her in a narrow street, whose lighting is a quaint
mixture of gaudy little oil lamps and electric globes. She lies,
in full view of passers-by, upon a low divan. A fenced veranda
rail separates it from the street. Above the wooden shelter
rises the shapely outline of a neem tree, whose white blossoms
make the air slightly fragrant.
"You must take off your shoes," my guide warns me." It
is considered disrespectful to wear them when you enter."
I obey him and a minute later we stand by her bedside.
She lies flat on her back, this ancient dame. Her head is
propped by pillows. The lustrous whiteness of her silky hair
offers a sad contrast to the heavily wrinkled face and seamed
brow.\n--- 第66页 ---\n64 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
Out of my slender store of newly-learnt Hindustani I
address a phrase of self-introduction to the old lady. She
turns her aged head, stretches out a skinny, bony forearm,
and then takes one of my hands in her own. She holds it
tightly, staring up at me with unworldly eyes.
Those eyes puzzle me. They seem to be quite uncompre
hending, entirely vacant. She silently grips my hand for three
or four minutes and continues to look blankly into my own
eyes. I receive the feeling that her gaze penetrates me. It is
a weird sensation. I do not know what to do. . . .
At last she withdraws her hand and brushes her forehead
several times. Then she turns to my guide and says something
to him, but it is in the vernacular and I cannot grasp its
meaning.
He whispers the translation:
" He has been called to India and soon he will understand."
A pause, and then she croaks forth another sentence, but its
meaning were better kept in my memory than in print.
Her voice is extremely feeble; her words emerge slowly
and with much difficulty. Is it possible that this aged and
decrepit fleshly frame, this haggard and huddled figure,
contains the soul of a genuine faqueer with wondrous powers?
Who can say? It is not always easy to read the pages of the
soul by the letters of the body.
But the woman is nearing her century. I have been warned
that continued conversation with her is not permissible, owing
to her enfeebled condition. I prepare to withdraw quietly,
strongly impressed by one thought. I think that the vacancy
of her eyes is a signal that she is near the gate of death. The
mind is parting from the worn-out body, but drags itself back
now and again to pay a feeble attention to this world through
strange eyes.1
In the hotel, I sum up my feelings. That some deep
psychological attainment really resides in the depths of her
being, I am certain. Respect rises unbidden within me. I
find that the contact has diverted my normal thought currents
and raised up an inexplicable sense of that element of mystery
which surrounds our earthly lives, despite all the discoveries
and speculations of the scientists. I see with unexpected
clarity that those scientific writers who profess to reveal the
fundamental secrets of the great world puzzle, profess what is
nothing more than surface scratching. But I cannot under-
1 I visited her again some months later. The impression of her
near decease was confirmed. She died soon after.\n--- 第67页 ---\nI MEET A MESSIAH 65
stand why a brief contact with the woman faqueer should so
sap at the very base of my confident mental certainties.
The cryptic prophecy she made recurs to my mind. I am
unable to grasp its meaning. No one has called me to India;
have I not gone freely of my own whim? . . . Only now, as
I write these lines, long after the event, do I believe that I
begin dimly to understand. 'Tis a strange world, my masters!\n--- 第68页 ---\nCHAPTER V
THE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER
T
HE hands race around my watch, the weeks move
across the face of my calendar, while I work my way
southwards across the Deccan plateau. I visit several
remarkable places, but find few remarkable men. Some
inscrutable, impelling force - which I cannot understand, but
which I blindly obey - hurries my pace so that sometimes I
rush onwards as though I am a tourist.
At last I am on the train to Madras, where I intend to halt
and establish myself for a while. During the long night journey,
when sleep is difficult to procure, I take count of the invisible
gains which I have reaped during these travels in Western
India.
I force myself to confess that so far I have not tracked down
any Yogi, about whose discovery I can feel unduly elated; as
for the thought of finding a Rishee, that now lies in the remote
depths of my mind. On the other hand, I have seen enough of
the gross superstitions and suffocating customs of sleepy
India, to make me realize that the scepticism and warnings
of some chance Bombay acquaintances are well justified.
I realize, too, that my self-imposed task will be difficult of
fulfilment. Pious men are here in all their fifty-seven
varieties, but they do not provide sufficient attraction. One
wanders by temples whose mysterious interior seems to promise
much. I cross the sacred precincts and stand at the threshold.
I peep inside and behold the fantastic worshippers, who toll a
bell as they pray, that their prayers may not escape the ears of
their chosen deity!
I am glad to reach Madras, whose straggling and colourful
appearance appeals to me, and I settle in a charming suburb
about two miles outside the city so as to get easier contact
with the Indian, rather than the European, element. My
house is in the Street of the Brahmins. The road is choked
with a thick layer of sand, into which my shoes readily sink;
66\n--- 第69页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 67
the sidewalk is made of beaten earth: everything is free from
the improving touch of the twentieth century. The white
washed houses have pillared porches and open verandas. In
the interior of mine, there is a tiled courtyard, around which
runs a covered gallery. Our water is hauled up by a bucket
from an old well.
The luxuriant tropical scenery which unfolds as soon as
one gets away from the two or three streets which compose
this suburb affords me perpetual delight. Soon I discover
that the Adyar River is less than half an hour's walk away.
There are several shady palm groves near this wide stream,
and they take my fancy. I spend my spare time loitering
among them or walk for a few miles beside the languid water.
The Adyar River flows down to Madras, of which city it
forms the southern boundary, and then joins the ocean amid
the ceaseless rise and fall of the Coromandel surf. Alongside
this beautiful stream I slowly amble one morning, accompanied
by a Brahmin acquaintance who learns where my interests lie.
After some time he suddenly seizes my arm.
"Look!" he exclaims. "Do you see that young man who
is approaching us? He is known to be a Yogi. He would
interest you, but, alas! he never talks to us."
" Why not?"
"I know where he lives, but he is the most reserved man
in the whole district."
By this time the stranger has almost reached us. He
possesses an athletic figure, and I judge him to be about thirty-
five. He is slightly above medium height. What strikes me
most, however, is the negroid character of his face. The skin
has darkened to a shade of black, and the broad flat nose, the
thick lips and muscular frame, all betoken non-Aryan blood.
His long neatly-plaited hair is gathered around the crown of
his head in a sort of top-knot. He wears a peculiar kind of
large ear-ring. A white shawl is wrapped around his body
and then flung across the left shoulder. The legs are bare
and the feet uncovered.
He completely ignores us and paces onwards with slow
steps. His eyes are downcast, as though intent on searching
the ground. One gathers the impression that the mind behind
those eyes is pondering over some matter. What, I wonder,
is the subject of this walking meditation?
He piques and arouses my interest still further. An intense
desire to break down the barriers which separate us grips me
suddenly.\n--- 第70页 ---\n68 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
"I want to talk to him. Let us turn back," I suggest.
The Brahmin protests firmly.
"It is useless."
"At least I can try," I answer.
The Brahmin again endeavours to dissuade me.
"That man is so inaccessible that we know hardly anything
of him. He keeps himself quite aloof from his neighbours.
We must not interfere with him."
But I am already moving in the reputed Yogi's direction
and my companion has perforce to follow me.
We are soon behind the other man, who gives no sign of his
awareness of our presence, but continues to pace slowly onward.
We follow with parallel steps.
"Please ask if I may converse with him," I tell my com
panion. The latter hesitates, and then shakes his head.
"No - I dare not," he declares weakly.
The unpleasant possibility that I might be missing a valuable
contact stirs me to further effort. There is no alternative
but to address the Yogi myself. I throw all conventions -
Hindu and European - to the wind, stand directly in his path
and face him. I try a brief sentence out of my slight stock
of Hindustani. He looks up; there is a half-smile around his
mouth, but he makes a negative gesture of the head.
At this time I know only a single word of Tamil, which is the
vernacular of Madras, and doubtless the Yogi knows even less
of English. Few people know Hindustani in the South, but
of this fact I am not yet aware. Fortunately, the Brahmin
begins to feel that he cannot leave me so helpless, and advances
to the rescue.
In a hesitant, apologetic voice, he says something in
Tamil.
The Yogi does not reply. His face hardens, the eyes become
cold and unfriendly.
The Brahmin looks at me embarrassed. A prolonged pause
follows. Neither of us knows what to do. I realize ruefully
what a difficult task it is to help hermits to find their tongues.
They dislike being interviewed, and they do not wish to talk
to strangers about their intimate experiences. They dislike,
especially, being asked to break their chronic silence for the
sake of a sun-helmeted white man, who is tacitly assumed to
possess neither sympathy with nor understanding of the
subtleties of Yoga.
This feeling is succeeded by another. I become strangely
aware of a penetrating inspection on the Yogi's part. Some-\n--- 第71页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 69
how, I sense that he is mentally probing my innermost thoughts.
Yet outwardly he remains aloof, indifferent. Am I mistaken?
But I cannot shake off this weird feeling that I have become
a kind of human microscopical specimen.
The Brahmin becomes very nervous and nudges me as a hint
to be off. Another minute and I shall yield to his silent
importunity and go away defeated.
The Yogi makes a sudden gesture of his hand, leads us
towards a tall palm tree close by, and silently bids us sit down
at its foot. He then drops to the ground himself.
He addresses some Tamil words to the Brahmin. I notice
that his voice possesses a peculiar resonance and a quality
which is almost musical.
"The Yogi says that he is willing to converse with you,"
my companion interprets, and then volunteers the statement
that the other man has peregrinated an unfrequented part of the
river for some years.
The first thing I ask is the man's name, whereupon I hear
such a lengthy string of appellations that I immediately
christen him anew. It appears that his first name is "Brama-
suganandah," that he possesses four other names all equally
long or longer, and that the only useful thing to do seems to be
to call him Brama. If I am to give all five of the names, the
words would stretch right across this page, so many letters are
there in each name! I am both awed and appalled at the
length of the young man's patronymic.1 It is, therefore,
better to maintain a discreet silence about them, and make
matters easier for unacclimatized readers by referring to him
henceforth as Brama, the shorter name which I bestow on him
in conversation.
"Please tell him that I am interested in Yoga and wish to
know something about it," I say.
The Yogi nods his head on hearing the translated statement.
"Yes, I can see that," he replies with a smile. "Let the
sahib ask questions."
"What kind of Yoga practice do you follow?"
"Mine is the system of Body Control. It is the most
difficult of all the Yogas. Body and breath must be fought as
though they were obstinate mules, and they must be conquered.
Thereafter the nerves and mind are more easily controlled."
1 Tamil, the vernacular of South-eastern India, is similar to Ger
man in the ease with which it forms lengthy compound words. With
the result that a train will carry you past a railway station called
Kulasekharapatnam, and - but I had better stop my pen in time!\n--- 第72页 ---\n70 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
"What benefit do you get from it?"
Brama gazes across the river.
"Health of the body, strength of the will, length of years
these are a few benefits," he says. "The Yogi who has
become a master in the training which I follow, brings the flesh
to iron-hard endurance. Pains do not move him. I know
one who submitted to an operation at the hands of a surgeon,
when no sleep-giving drug could be used. He endured it
without a murmur. Such a one can also experience in his
unprotected body the most intense cold, yet receive no hurt."
I whip out my note-book, for I perceive that our conversation
is likely to prove more interesting than I anticipated. Brama
smiles again at my stenography, but does not object.
"Tell me more about your Yoga system," I beg him.
"My master has lived on the open mountains of the Hima
layas, surrounded by snow and ice and wearing a cinnamon-
coloured robe for his only comfort. He can sit down for
several hours at a stretch in a place where it is so cold that
water instantly freezes. Yet he will feel no distress. Such is
the power of our Yoga."
"You are a disciple, then?"
"Yes. There are still many hills to climb. I have given
twelve years of unstopping effort to practise our exercises
every day."
"And you have attained some unusual powers ?"
Brama nods his head, but maintains a stolid silence.
I am intrigued more and more by this strange young
man.
"Is it permissible to ask how you became a Yogi? " I query,
somewhat uncertainly.
At first there is no answer. We three continue to squat
under the fronded palm. I hear the hoarse cries of errant
crows among a group of coconut trees on the opposite bank
of the river. Mingling with this noise comes the fitful chatter
of a few monkeys, who explore the tree-tops. From the shore
rises the quiet plash of the water.
"Most willingly!" comes Brama's sudden reply. I think
he realizes that my questions are prompted by something
deeper than mere academic curiosity. He hides his hand
beneath his shawl, fixes his gaze upon some object on the
other side of the river, and begins to speak:
"I was a quiet and lonely child; there was no pleasure for
me in the usual habits of children. I did not care to play with
the others, but liked to wander alone in gardens or in the\n--- 第73页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 71
fields. Few people understand a brooding boy, and I cannot
say that I was happy with life. About the age of twelve I
happened, by mere chance, to overhear the conversation of
some older persons, and it was through their talk that I first
discovered the existence of Yoga. This event aroused in me a
desire to learn more of the matter. I began to enquire into it
among several people and in this way was able to get a few
books in Tamil, which revealed many interesting things about
the Yogis. As a horse riding through a desert thirsts for
water, so did my mind thirst for still further knowledge about
them. But I came to a point where it seemed impossible to
get to know more. One day I re-read, as if by chance, a sen
tence in one of my books. It was: 'To succeed on the path
of Yoga, one must have a personal teacher.' These words
now made a tremendous impression on me. I felt that only
by leaving home and travelling about could I find a suitable
teacher. To this course, my parents would not give permission.
Not knowing what else to do, I began to practise in secret
some breathing exercises, about which I had collected some
scraps of information. These practices did not help me;
instead, they injured me. I did not then realize that without
the guidance of an expert teacher, it is not safe for anyone to
do them. But my eagerness was such that I could not wait
till I met a teacher. Within a few years the effect of these
breathing exercises showed itself. A small rupture made its
appearance on the top of my head; it seemed that the skull
was broken in its weakest spot. Anyway, blood streamed
from the wound and my body became cold and numb. I
thought I was dying. Two hours later a strange vision crossed
my mind's eye. I seemed to see the figure of a venerable
Yogi, who addressed me, saying: ' You now see what a
dangerous condition you have brought yourself into by these
forbidden practices. Let this be a severe lesson to you.' The
vision disappeared and, peculiarly enough, from that moment
my state grew better and I completely recovered. But the
scar remains still."
Brama bends his head so as to show the crown to our eyes.
A tiny rounded scar is plainly visible on his poll.
"After this unfortunate experience I gave up breathing
exercises and waited for some years until home ties were
looser," he goes on. "When my opportunity for freedom
came, I left home and went out in search of a teacher. I knew
that the best way to test a teacher is to live with him for a few
months. I found several teachers and divided my time\n--- 第74页 ---\n72 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
between staying with them for a while and returning home
disappointed. Some were the heads of monasteries; others
were the chiefs of institutions of spiritual learning, but somehow
none of them satisfied me. They gave me plenty of philosophy,
but little from their own experience. Most of them could
only repeat what the books said; they could offer no really
practical guidance. I did not want book theories so much as
practical experience of Yoga. Thus, I visited no less than ten
teachers, but they did not seem to be the real Yoga masters.
I did not despair, though. My youthful eagerness burnt more
strongly, for rebuffs only increase my determination to succeed.
"I was now at the gate of manhood. I resolved to leave the
home of my fathers for ever, to renounce the worldly life and
to search till death for a true master. I then set out from home
on my eleventh wandering or pilgrimage. I moved about
until I came to a large village in the district of Tanjore. I went
down to the river-side for my morning bath and afterwards
walked along the bank. Soon I came to a small shrine built of
red stone, or rather, it was a miniature temple. I peered
inside out of curiosity and was surprised to see a number of
men gathered in a circle around a man who was almost nude;
in fact, he was wearing only a cod-piece.1 The men were
looking at him with expressions of the utmost respect. There
was something venerable, dignified and mysterious in the face
of the central figure. I remained at the entrance, awed and
fascinated. I soon gathered that the little meeting was receiving
some kind of instruction and I had a strong feeling that the
man in the centre was a real Yogi, a genuine master and not
merely a book-filled scholar. I cannot explain why I felt that.
"Suddenly, the teacher turned his face towards the door
and our eyes met. I then obeyed my inner urge and walked
into the temple. The teacher greeted me warmly, bade me sit
down, and said: 'Six months ago I was directed to take you
as a pupil. Now you have come.' I remembered with a
pleasant shock that it was exactly six months since I left home
to begin my eleventh journey. However, it was thus that I met
my master. Thereafter, I accompanied him wherever he
travelled. Sometimes he would go into the towns; sometimes
he would withdraw into secluded forests or lonely jungles.
With his help I began to make good progress upon the path of
Yoga, and I was satisfied at last. My teacher was a Yogi of
great experience, though the path he followed was that of
Body Control. There are several systems of Yoga; they are
1 A semi-loincloth.\n--- 第75页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 73
very different in their methods and exercises; and the system
I was taught is the only one which begins with the body
instead of the mind. I was also taught how to obtain breath
control. On one occasion I had to fast for forty days, to
prepare myself to receive one of the Yogic powers.
"You may imagine how surprised I was one day when my
teacher sent for me and said: 'The life of total withdrawal
from the world is not yet for you. Go back to your people and
live a normal life. You will marry and have one child. At the
age of thirty-nine certain signs will be given you, and after that
you will find yourself free to retire from the world again. You
will then go to the forests and practise solitary meditation until
you reach the goal which every Yogi seeks. I shall be waiting
for you and you can return to me.'
"I obeyed his commands and returned to my native place.
In due course I married a faithful and devoted woman, who
bore me one child, exactly as my teacher had predicted. But
not long after, my wife died. My parents were no longer living,
so I left my native town and came here to stay in the house of an
old widow who also comes from there and who knew me as a
child. She looks after my domestic needs and yet, because the
years have made her discreet, she permits me to live the
reserved existence which the rules of our school enjoin."
Brama ceases talking and I am so impressed by his narrative
that my questioning tongue is likewise stilled. There are two
or three minutes of complete silence and then the Yogi rises,
turns his face homewards, and begins to walk slowly. The
Brahmin and myself follow him.
Our path leads through lovely palm groves and through
pretty clumps of casuarina. The river shines in the bright
sunlight and an hour or so is passed pleasantly as we stroll along
its banks. Anon, we begin to enter the haunts of men. Fisher
folk wade into the water to carry on their work in the ancient
way. For they fish neither from boats nor from the shore,
but stand waist high in the stream and hold their nets and
baskets.
The beauty of the scene is enhanced by the brightly-plumed
birds which flutter down to the river. The air is slightly scented
by a gentle breeze, which blows pleasantly in our faces from the
direction of the sea. We reach a road where I leave the river
regretfully. A herd of squeaking pigs passes us. They are
under the care of a grey-haired, low caste woman, who hits
unfortunate stragglers with a bamboo stick.
Brama turns eventually to bid us farewell. I express the hope\n--- 第76页 ---\n74 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
that I may be allowed to see him again. He assents. I then
venture to ask whether I may have the honour of a visit from
him. To the great surprise of my Brahmin companion, the
Yogi readily agrees to call in the evening.
§
With the fall of dusk I await Brama's arrival somewhat
eagerly. Several questions tumble over each other in my mind.
His brief autobiography has intrigued me, while his strange
character has puzzled me.
When the servant announces him, I descend the few steps
which lead from the veranda and hold up my hands, with palms
touching, as a token of welcome. The symbolism of this
common Hindu greeting, which I have soon learnt, will appear
quaint to the Western mind. For the gesture indicates, "My
soul and yours are one!" The Hindus delight to receive it
from a European, which reveals the rarity of that event, though
it is nothing more than the Indian substitute for shaking hands.
I want to be accepted as one with friendly intent, and therefore I
try to respect the Indian customs and conventions, so far as
I am aware of them. This does not mean that I am going to
"turn native" - I have no such purpose - but that I believe
in treating others as I would have them treat me.
Brama accompanies me into the large room and immediately
squats cross-legged on the floor.
"Will you not sit on the divan?" I ask him, through the
interpreter. "It is well cushioned and extremely comfort
able." But no - he prefers the hard floor! And Indian floors
are laid with tiles, not boards.
I express my gratitude for his visit and offer him some food,
which he accepts and eats in silence.
After the meal I feel that I must tell him something about
myself, something that will explain my sudden intrusion into
his existence. And so I enter into a brief account of the forces
which drew me to India. At its close, Brama emerges from the
bulwark of aloofness behind which he has so far hidden, and
puts his hand on my shoulder in a friendly way.
"That such men should exist in the West it is pleasant to
hear. You have not wasted your journey, for you shall learn
much. It is a happy day for me that destiny brought our feet
to the same spot. Whatever you wish to know, ask, and, so far
as my oaths permit me, I shall gladly tell you."\n--- 第77页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 75
This sounds like good luck, indeed! I ask him about the
nature of his Yoga system, its history and its aims.
"Who dare say how old is the system of Body Control which
I have studied? Our secret texts declare that it was revealed
by the god Shiva to the sage Gheranda. From his lips it was
learnt by the sage Marteyanda, who then taught it to others,
and thus it came down in a continuous line through thousands
of years; but how many thousands we neither know nor care,
though we believe that it is the last of the Yoga sciences that
were born in antiquity. Such was the decline of man even in
those days, that the gods had to give him a way of spiritual
salvation which led purely through the body. The Yoga of
Body Control is little understood except by the adepts who
have mastered it, and the common people possess the most
false notions of our ancient science. And since such adepts
are, alas! so infrequently to be found to-day, the most foolish
and distorted practices pass as our system without hindrance
among the multitude. Go to Benares and you will see a man
who sits all day and sleeps all night on a bed of sharp spikes;
and in another place you will see a man who holds one arm
aloft in the air until it is half withered from disuse and until
the nails are several inches long. You will be told that they are
men who practise our system of Yoga, but it is not so. Such
men bring shame on it, rather. Our aim is not to torture the
body in foolish ways for the sake of public wonder; these self-
torturing ascetics are ignorant men who have picked up by
hearsay, or from some friendly person, a few exercises in the
forced contortion of the body. But since they know not what
are our objects, they distort these practices and prolong them
unnaturally. Yet the common people venerate such fools and
bestow food and money upon them."
"But are they to blame? If the real Yogis make themselves
so scarce and keep their methods so secret, then misunder
standings will surely arise," I object.
Brama draws up his shoulders and a scornful expression
passes across his mouth.
"Does a Rajah keep his jewels on the highway for public
display?" he asks. "No, he hides them in the treasure cham
bers deep down in the vaults of his palace. The knowledge of
our science is one of the greatest treasures a man can have.
Is he to offer it in the bazaar for all and sundry? Whoever
desires to grasp this treasure - let him search for it. That is
the only way, but it is the right way. Our texts enjoin secrecy
again and again, while our masters will reveal the important\n--- 第78页 ---\n76 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
teachings only to tested disciples who have been faithful to
them for some years at least. Ours is the most secret of all the
Yogas; it is full of grave dangers, not only to the disciple him
self, but to others. Think you that I am allowed to reveal any
but its most elementary doctrines to you, or even those without
extreme discretion?"
"I see."
"But there is a branch of our science about which I may talk
to you more freely. It is that wherein we strengthen the will
and improve the body of beginners, for only so can they be fit
to attempt the difficult practices of real Yoga."
"Ah, that would interest the West!"
"We have nearly a score of body exercises which strengthen
the different parts and organs, and remove or prevent certain
diseases. Some of them are postures which press upon special
nerve centres; these in turn affect certain organs which are
not working properly, and help to put them right."
"Do you use medicines? "
"Certain herbs, plucked under a waxing moon, are used if
necessary. We have four kinds of exercises or methods to
accomplish this early work of putting the body's health in
good order. First, we learn the art of repose so that the nerves
may be soothed. For that, there are four suitable exercises.
Then we learn the 'stretches,' which are exercises copied from
the natural stretching of healthy animals. Third, we clean the
body thoroughly by a variety of methods which may seem very
curious to you, but which are indeed excellent in their effect.
Lastly, we study the art of breathing and its control."
I express a desire to receive a demonstration of some exer
cises.
"There is no dark secret in those which I shall show you
now," Brama smiles. "Let us begin with the art of repose.
We can learn something of this matter from the cat. Our
master places a cat in the circle of his pupils and gets them to
notice how graceful the animal becomes when in repose. He
instructs them to observe it carefully when the midday heat
sends it to sleep. He tells them to watch it closely when it
crouches in front of a mouse hole. He makes it clear to them
that the cat sets a perfect example of true rest, and that it
knows how to store and keep every bit of strength. You
imagine that you know how to rest, but really you do not. You
sit in that chair for a while, then move from side to side, then
fidget, and then sprawl out your legs. Though you do not rise
from the chair and outwardly seem to be at ease, one thought\n--- 第79页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 77
after another races through your brain. Can you call that
repose? Is it not a way of still being active?"
"That is a point of view which has never occurred to me,"
I say.
"Animals know how to rest themselves, but not many men
have this knowledge. This is because animals are guided by
instinct, which is the voice of Nature, while men are guided by
their thoughts. And since men largely lack control over their
brains, their nerves and bodies are affected as a result; there is
little real repose for them."
"What must we do, then?"
"The first thing you must learn is nothing more than the
Oriental form of sitting! Chairs may indeed be useful in the
cold rooms of your Northern countries, but you must learn to
do without them during the times of exercise which shall pre
pare you for Yoga. Our way of sitting is really most restful.
After working or walking, it gives peace to the entire body.
The easiest way for you to learn it is to place a small rug or mat
before the wall of your room; sit upon this as comfortably
as you can and use the wall to support your back. Or you can
place the mat in the centre of the room, and then use a couch
or chair to lean against. After that, bend the legs inwards at
the knees and cross the feet. There need be no feeling of
strain and you must not tighten the muscles. So your first
exercise will be to sit like that and keep your body quite still,
except for the effort of gentle breathing. And having got into
that position, you must promise yourself that you will with
draw your thoughts from all worldly burdens and affairs; just
rest your mind on a beautiful object, a picture or a flower."
I leave my easy chair and drop on the floor, facing Brama,
assuming the attitude he has just described. It is the position
of an old-time tailor sitting cross-legged at his work.
"Yes, you do it easily," observes Brama, "but other
Europeans may not find it comfortable, because they are not
accustomed to it. You have one fault - keep your back
bone straight, not bent. Let me show you another of our
exercises."
Brama proceeds to raise his knees toward his chin, though
still keeping his feet crossed. This position draws his feet
away somewhat from the trunk. He clasps his hands around
the front of his knees.
"This position is very restful after you have been standing
on your legs for a long time. Be careful to throw most of the
body's weight upon the seat. You may practise this for a few\n--- 第80页 ---\n78 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
minutes, whenever you feel very tired. It will soothe important
nerve centres."
"It is extremely simple, anyway."
"We need nothing complicated to learn the art of repose;
in fact, our easiest exercise gives excellent results. Lie flat on
your back, legs stretched out side by side. Turn the toes out
ward. Let your hands be extended and rest them alongside
the body. Relax every muscle. Close the eyes. Give your
whole weight to the floor. You cannot do this exercise properly
in a bed, as it is important to keep the backbone perfectly flat.
Use a rug laid upon the floor. In this attitude, Nature's healing
forces will rest you. We call this the corpse position. By
practice, you may learn to rest in any of these attitudes for an
hour, if you wish. They take away tension of muscle and
soothe nerves. Repose of muscle comes before repose of
mind."
"Really, your exercises seem to consist of nothing more than
sitting still in some way or other!"
"Is that nothing? You Westerners thirst to be active, but
is repose to be despised? Do calm nerves possess no mean
ing? Repose is the beginning of all Yoga, but it is not our
need alone; it is also the need of your world."
Brama's words are not without justification.
"Those exercises are enough for this evening," he adds.
"I must go."
I thank him for what he has told me, and beg for further
instruction.
"To-morrow morning you may find me along the river,"
he replies.
Gathering his white shawl around his shoulders, he touches
his palms in farewell and is gone. I am left to ruminate upon
the interesting conversation which has so abruptly ended.
§
I meet the Yogi again on many occasions. At his desire, I
intercept him on his morning walks, but when I can cajole him
indoors, he spends his evenings with me. Those evenings
prove extremely fruitful for me and my quest, because he
unfolds a more arcane knowledge when the moon displays her
self than he is willing to unfold under a high sun.
A little enquiry enables me to solve a point which has puzzled
me for a while. I have been under the impression that the\n--- 第81页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 79
Hindus are a brown race. Why, then, is Brama's skin dark
to the point of negroid blackness?
The answer is that he belongs to an indigenous population
which appears to be India's first inhabitant. When the
Aryans - India's earliest invaders - broke through the moun
tains in the north-west thousands of years ago and descended
into the plains, they found this native race of Dravidians and
drove them into the South. These Dravidians remain a
separate people to this day, except that they have absorbed the
religion of their conquerors. The fiery tropic sun has pig
mented their skins almost black, which, together with other
evidences, makes certain ethnologists think that they primally
arose out of some African stock. As in those early days of their
undisputed sway over the entire country, the Dravidians still
wear their hair long and tied in a knot behind their heads, and
they still speak their primal, half-chanted tongues, of which
the most important is Tamil.
Brama makes the confident assertion that the brown invaders
took their knowledge of Yoga from his own race, just as they
took certain other things in addition. But scholarly Hindus
to whom I mention this claim deny it as absurd; I, therefore,
leave the less important question of origin to settle itself!
Because I am not writing a thesis around the subject of
Yogic physical culture, I do not purpose to describe more
than two or three exercises in the art of adopting and main
taining fixed bodily attitudes, which appears to be so prominent
a feature of the Yoga of Body Control. The twenty or more
postural methods which Brama demonstrates, either in a palm
fringed grove or in my more prosaic quarters, involve strangely
contorted attitudes, and, to Western eyes at least, must appear
either ludicrous or impossible, or both. Some of them require
balancing on both knees with feet upturned, or balancing the
entire weight of the body upon the tips of one's fingers; others
take the arms behind the back and somehow bring the hands to
the front again on opposite sides; others again tie up all the
limbs in a complicated knot; still others put the legs round the
neck or over the shoulders, in acrobatic manner; while a
fifth group twist and turn the trunk in the queerest imaginable
style. It is while watching Brama perform some of these feats
that I begin to perceive how difficult will this art of Yoga be.
"How many of these exercises comprise your system?'
I enquire.
"There are eighty-four postures in the Yoga of Body
Control," replies Brama, "though I do not know more than\n--- 第82页 ---\n80 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
sixty-four at present." Even as he speaks he practises one of
these postures and sits in it as comfortably as I sit in a chair.
Indeed, he tells me that this is his favourite posture. It is not
a difficult one, this, but it does seem uncomfortable. His
left foot is tucked into the groin and the heel of the other foot
is placed under the base of the body, the right leg being doubled
back so as to carry most of the weight,
"What is the use of such a posture? " I ask again.
"If a Yogi enters into it and then practises a certain breathing
exercise, he will become more youthful."
"And that breathing exercise ? "
"I am not permitted to reveal it to you."
"What is the object of all these postures, then?"
"The mere fact of sitting or standing for regular periods
in certain fixed postures may seem of small importance in
your eyes. But the concentration of attention and will power
upon the chosen posture is so intense - if success is to be
gained - that sleeping forces awaken within the Yogi. Those
forces belong to the secret realms of Nature; therefore they
are seldom fully aroused until our breathing exercises are also
practised, for the breath possesses deep powers. Though the
awakening of such forces is our real aim, no less than a score
of our exercises are capable of being used for benefiting one's
health or to remove certain diseases; while others will drive
impurities out of the body. Is this not of great use? Still
other postures are intended to assist our efforts to get control
over the mind and soul, for it is a truth that the body influences
thought no less than thought influences the body. In the
advanced stages of Yoga, when we may be plunged for hours
in meditation, the proper posture of the body not only enables
the mind to remain undistracted in its efforts, but actually
assists its purpose. Add to all these things the tremendous
gain in will power which comes to the man who perseveres in
these difficult exercises, and you may see what virtues there are
in our methods."
"But why all this twisting and turning?" I object.
"Because there are many nerve-centres scattered throughout
the body, and each posture affects a different centre. Through
the nerves we can influence either the organs of the body or
the thoughts in the brain. Those twists enable us to reach
nerve centres which otherwise might remain untouched."
"I see." The basis of this Yogic physical culture begins to
shape itself a little more clearly in my mind. It is interesting
to ascertain how it compares with the basic principles of our\n--- 第83页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 81
European and American systems. I tell Brama about the
existence of the latter.
"I do not know your Western systems, but I have seen white
soldiers being drilled at the great camp near Madras. By
watching them I have understood what their instructors
wished to do. Strengthening the muscles seems to have been
their first object, because you Westerners find your highest
virtues in being bodily active. Therefore, you make much use
of the limbs in a most energetic manner, repeating those
movements again and again. You spend energy vigorously,
so that you may build up the muscles and receive greater
strength in return. That is a good thing to do in the cold
countries of the North, doubtless."
"What is the chief difference between the methods, as you
see it?"
"Our Yoga exercises are really poses and require no further
movements after the pose has been taken up. Instead of seeking
more energy with which to be active, we seek to increase the
power of endurance. You see, we believe that though the
development of the muscles may be useful, it is the power
which is behind them that is of greater value. Thus, if I tell
you that standing on your shoulders in a particular way will
wash the brain with blood, soothe the nerves and remove
certain weaknesses, you as a Westerner would probably do the
exercise for a moment and repeat it several times with a rush.
You may strengthen the muscles which are called into action
by this exercise, but you would get little of the benefits which
a Yogi gets by doing it in his own way."
"And what may that be?"
"He will do it slowly, with deliberation, and then maintain
the position as steadily as he can for some minutes. Let me
show you this All-Body posture, as we call it."
Brama lies flat upon his back, hands at sides and legs to
gether. He raises his legs into the air, keeping the knees quite
straight, until they have attained about two-thirds of a right
angle with the floor. He supports his back with his hands,
resting the elbows on the floor. The body is then tilted com
pletely upward, his trunk and hips becoming vertical. The
chest is brought forward to touch the chin. The hands form
a bracket which supports the trunk. The weight of the body is
supported by the shoulders and the back of the neck and head.
After maintaining this upside down position for about five
minutes, the Yogi gets up and explains its value.
"This posture brings blood flowing down to the brain by its\n--- 第84页 ---\n82 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
own weight for a few minutes. In the ordinary position the
blood has to be forced upwards by the pumping action of the
heart. The difference between the two ways is shown by the
soothing effect of the posture upon the brain and nerves. For
men who work with their minds, thinkers and students, the
quiet practice of this all-body posture brings quick relief when
their brains are tired. This is not its only virtue. It strengthens
the sex organs. But these benefits come only if the exercise is
done in our way and not in your hasty Western manner."
"If I am not mistaken, you mean that the Yoga attitudes
keep the body fixed in a state of poised stillness, whereas our
Western exercises violently agitate it?"
"Even so," agrees Brama.
A further exercise which I select from Brama's repertory
as being more within the compass of Western limbs, is one
which should quickly yield to patience and practice. In this
posture, the Yogi sits with extended legs, raises both arms over
his head and crooks the first fingers. He bends his trunk for
ward, exhaling the breath while doing so, and grasps the big
toes of his feet inside the hooked fingers. The right toe is
caught by the right index finger, and so on. Then he slowly
bends his head forward until it falls between his outstretched
arms and the forehead lies flat against his thighs. He keeps
this curious position for a little while and then gradually returns
to a normal attitude.
"Do not try to do this all at once," he warns me. "Try to
bring the head a little closer to the knees little by little only;
even if it takes a few weeks to succeed in this posture, once you
have mastered it, it will be yours for years."
I learn that this exercise strengthens the spine, as indeed one
might expect it to do; that it removes nervous troubles caused
through spinal weakness; and that it will work wonders with
the blood circulation.
In the next posture, Brama sits on the floor and then doubles
his legs up underneath him; thus the soles of his feet come
under the base of his body. He drops the trunk backward
until his shoulders touch the floor. He crosses his arms under
neath the back of the head, which is then cushioned upon them.
Each hand now grasps the opposite shoulder joint. He remains
in this not unshapely pose for some minutes. On emerging
from it, he explains that nerve centres situate in the neck and
shoulders, as well as in the legs, are favourably affected by the
exercise; and that even the chest is benefited.
The average Englishman is so apt to regard the average\n--- 第85页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 83
Indian as a weakling, as an enervated product of tropic sun and
under-feeding, that it surprises one to learn that such a care
fully thought out native system of physical culture has existed
in India since antiquity. If our Western systems possess such
a usefulness that no one would dream of disputing their value
at this day, this is not to say that they are consequently com
plete and that they have pronounced the last word on bodily
development, health preservation and the eradication of disease.
Perhaps if the West, with its thorough methods of scientifically
directed research, would pick some dust-covered practices out
of the traditional teaching of Yoga, we might arrive at a com
pleter knowledge of our bodies and a fuller regime for the
healthy life.
Yet I know that perhaps not more than a round dozen of the
Yoga postures are easy enough to be worth our time and
trouble. The seventy odd postures which compose the re
mainder of the system are hardly likely to yield to any except
the most enthusiastic, and that only if they are young enough to
have flexible limbs and supple bodies.
Brama himself admits:
"I have practised hard each day for twelve years; only in
this way could I master the sixty-four postures which I know.
And then I was fortunate enough to begin while young, for a
man of mature years could not even attempt these postures
without feeling much pain. Bone, muscle and flesh settle down
into stiffened positions in a grown man and can be disturbed
only with difficulty and with pain. Yet even then it is remark
able how the postures can be conquered by continued efforts."
I do not doubt Brama's assertion that anyone may master
these exercises by persistent practice, only the slow breaking-in
of limbs, joints and muscles to the novel positions into which
they are introduced must necessarily be such a dilatory process
as to embrace the years. He has the advantage of beginning
these postures when hardly out of his 'teens, and the value of
this early beginning cannot be over-estimated. Just as success
ful acrobats are usually those who have been trained in child
hood, so is it obvious that successful Yogis of the school of
Body Control must start their training before the growing
period ends, say before twenty-five. I certainly do not know
how it is possible for any adult European to adventure with the
scores of intricate postures which comprise most of their
system without breaking a bone or two in the undertaking.
When I argue this with Brama, he grants only a partial agree
ment and stubbornly maintains that continued efforts may\n--- 第86页 ---\n84 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
succeed in many cases, though not in all. But he agrees that
Europeans may have a harder task.
"We Orientals have the advantage of having learnt to sit
with folded legs from childhood. Can a European bend his
legs and sit steadily for two hours without pain? Yet the cross
ing of the legs with intertwined ankles forms but the beginning
of several of our postures. We look upon it as one of the best.
Shall I show it?"
Thereupon Brama assumes that position which has been
made familiar to the Western world by the numerous pictures
and images of the Buddha. Sitting perfectly erect, he folds the
right leg so as to tuck the foot into the left groin. Then he
folds the other leg and brings his left foot across to the right
thigh, where its heel touches the lower corner of the abdomen.
The soles of his feet are turned up. It is an artistic and
balanced pose; the thought occurs to me that such an attractive
posture may be worth trying.
I try to imitate him and am rewarded for my labours with
excruciating pains in the ankles. I complain that I cannot
achieve this position even for a single moment. How pic
turesquely exotic has this Buddha seat seemed to me in the
past, when I have seen it exemplified in some attractive bronze
figure which is placed in the window of a curio shop! But
how unnatural does this twisting of the lower limbs now seem
to me in India, when I attempt to exemplify it in my own
person! Brama's smiling encouragement fails to reassure me.
I tell him that I must postpone my efforts.
"Your joints are stiff," he observes. "Rub a little oil into
the ankles and knees before you practise it again. You are so
accustomed to sitting in chairs that the posture will put some
strain on your limbs. A little practice every day will slowly
remove the difficulty."
"I doubt whether I could ever do it."
"Say not that it is impossible. It will take you a long time,
but you shall surely master it. Success will take you by sur
prise one day; it comes suddenly."1
"It is so painful that it feels like a new torture! "2
"But the pain will lessen, and though it may take a much
1 I state the fact for what it is worth that, lured by the attractiveness
of the Buddha position, I succeeded, after sporadic and painful
efforts, in achieving it eight months later. Thereafter the difficulty
disappeared.
2 It is necessary to warn amateur dabblers in these Yoga posturings
against the grave risks they incur. A surgeon to whom I described
them, said that a strained ankle or a broken tendon are likely injuries.\n--- 第87页 ---\nTHE ANCHORITE OF THE ADYAR RIVER 85
longer time than it will to reach success, you will reach a point
where the posture brings no pain with it."
"But is it worth while for me to attempt it?"
"Assuredly. The Lotus posture - for that is what we name
it - is so important that none of our novices are permitted to
miss it, however much he is allowed to avoid other postures.
It is the chief attitude in which advanced Yogis perform their
meditations. One reason is that it gives a solid base to the
body, which is unlikely to topple over should the Yogi pass
into a deep trance - an event which sometimes occurs un
expectedly, though the adepts can pass into trance at will.
You see, the Lotus posture locks the feet together and holds
the body quiet and steady. A restless and irritated body will
disturb the mind, but in the Lotus posture one feels poised and
self-controlled. In this attitude it becomes easier to win the
power of mind concentration, which is so greatly prized
among us. Lastly, we practise our breathing exercises mostly
when sitting in this posture, for the combination arouses the
spirit-fire which sleeps in the body. When this unseeable fire
awakens, all the blood in the body is redistributed afresh, while
the nerve force is sent with great keenness to certain important
points."
With this explanation I remain content and bring our talk of
postures to a close. For Brama has earlier thrown himself into
a large number of fearful contortions and convulsive pos-
turings for my edification, just to show me something of his
mastery over flesh and bone. What Westerner has the patience
to go through all these complicated exercises and master them?
What Westerner has even the time to do so?\n--- 第88页 ---\nCHAPTER VI
THE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH
Brama expresses a wish that I shall visit his dwelling.
He tells me that he does not actually stay in the house,
but has erected a roomy hut in the garden at the rear
so as to keep his freedom and preserve his independence.
Accordingly - and I must confess, with some eagerness - I
call at the house one afternoon. The building stands in a dusty
street, which bears a desolate and neglected air. I stand for a
moment outside the ancient whitewashed structure and survey
its wooden upper storey, whose projecting window is so remi
niscent of our medieval European houses. I push open the
heavy old door which confronts me, an act which sends a
rattling echo through the rooms and passages.
An old woman, whose motherly smile stretches broadly
across her face, appears almost at once and bows repeatedly
before me. She leads me through a long darkened passage
until we emerge through a kitchen into the back garden.
The first thing I notice is a spreading peepul tree and then,
under the protective shade of its branches, an old fashioned
well. The woman guides me to a hut on the other side of the
well and close enough to it to receive some of the tree's shade.
It is lightly built of bamboo posts, thin wooden cross beams
and a thatched grass roof.
The dame, whose face is as black as Brama's, becomes
visibly excited and bursts out into a series of trembling Tamil
sentences, apparently addressed to the hut. A musical voice
answers from within, the door slowly opens, the Yogi appears
and then affectionately draws me into his simple hermitage.
He omits to close the door. The widow remains in the entrance
for the next few minutes, her eyes glued upon me, her face
exuding indescribable happiness.
I find myself in a plain room. A low cushionless divan
stands along the farther wall and a rudely made wooden
bench, which is littered with papers, fills a corner. A heavily
86\n--- 第89页 ---\nTHE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH 87
chased brass water-pot hangs by a cord from one of the roof
beams. The floor is covered with a large piece of matting.
"Seat yourself!" says Brama, waving a hand towards the
floor. "We have no chair to offer you; I am sorry."
We all squat around the mat - Brama, myself, and a young
student-teacher who has attached himself to me and is now
acting as interpreter. Within a few minutes the old widow
departs, only to return later with a pot of tea, which is served
upon the mat in lieu of a table. She departs again and re
appears with biscuits, oranges and plantain fruits, which are
heaped upon brass dishes.
Before we begin to take these pleasant refreshments, Brama
produces a garland of yellow marigolds and hangs it around
my neck. I am astonished and protest strongly, for I know
that this Indian custom is usually reserved for distinguished
persons and I have never classed myself in that sublime
category.
"But, brother - ," he pleads smilingly. "You are the first
European to visit my abode and the first to become my friend.
I must express my delight, and the delight of this lady here,
by honouring you in this way"
My further protests prove of no avail. I have perforce to
sit on the floor with a wreath of marigolds draped ceremoni
ously over my jacket. I am indeed glad that Europe is suffici
ently far away for none of my friends to notice this odd sight
and laugh at me!
We drink our tea, eat the fruit and chat pleasantly for a
while. Brama informs me that he built the hut and made the
rude furniture with his own hands. The sight of the papers
on the corner bench arouse my curiosity, and I beg him to tell
me their raison d'etre. For I observe that the papers are all of
a pink colour and that they have been written on in green ink.
Brama picks up a handful, which I perceive are written in
quaint characters easily recognizable as Tamil. The student-
teacher examines the documents but finds them hard to read
and harder to understand. He informs me that they are written
in an obsolete form of Tamil which was the literary form of
early centuries, but is nowadays understood only by few
persons. He adds that the great classics of Tamil philosophy
and literature are unfortunately written in this archaic form of
language, which is called high Tamil, and which presents more
difficulties for those only familiar with the modern living
vernacular than medieval English presents to the average
present-day English-knowing person.\n--- 第90页 ---\n88 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
"These papers are written by me mostly at night," Brama
explains. "Some of them are accounts of my Yoga experi
ences written in verse, and some are lengthy poems where I
let my heart speak its religion. There are a few young men who
call themselves my pupils, who often come here to read these
writings aloud."
Brama picks up an artistic-looking document, which consists
of a few pages of pink paper written on in red and green
inks and tied with a green ribbon, and smilingly presents it
to me.
"I have written this especially for you," he declares.
The young interpreter finds it to be a poem of eighty-four
lines. It opens and closes with a mention of my name, but
beyond this the young man can hardly travel. He deciphers
occasional words and tells me that the poem evidently contains
some kind of personal message, but it is written in such high
Tamil that he is not. competent to render a proper translation
of it. However, I am extremely pleased to receive this unex
pected gift, especially as it is an expression of the Yogi's good
will.
After the celebrations of my visit are finally over, the old
lady departs and we settle down to serious talk. I plunge anew
into that matter of breathing which seems to play so important
a part in Yoga, and which is wrapped in such secrecy. Brama
regrets that he can show me no further exercises for the present,
but he is willing to tell me a little more of his theories.
"Nature has measured out 21,600 breath-rhythms to every
man, which he must use up daily and nightly from one sunrise
till the next. Quick, noisy and tumultuous breathing exceeds
this measure and therefore shortens one's life. Slow, deep and
quiet breathing economizes this allowance, and so lengthens
life. Every breath which is saved goes to build up a great
reserve, and out of this reserve a man can draw extra years for
living. Yogis do not take so many breaths as other men; nor
do they need to for - but, alas! how can I explain further
without transgressing my oaths?"
This reserve of the Yogi tantalizes me. Is it possible that a
knowledge which is hidden away with so much pains cannot
have something of real worth in it? If that is really the case,
then one can understand why these strange men cover up their
tracks and conceal the treasure of their teachings in order
to ward off the superficially curious, the mentally unready
and perhaps the spiritually unworthy. Is it likely that I,
too, may come within one of these latter classifications and\n--- 第91页 ---\nTHE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH 89
eventually leave the country with little more than my trouble
for reward?
But Brama is speaking again:
"Have not our masters the keys to the powers of breath?
They know how close is the connection between the blood and
the breath; they understand how the mind, too, follows the
path of the breath; and they have the secret of how it is possible
to awaken awareness of the soul through workings of the breath
and thought. Shall I not say that breath is but the expression
in this world of a subtler force, which is the real sustainer of the
body? It is this force which hides in the vital organs, though
it is unseeable. When it leaves the body the breathing stops
in obedience and death is the result. But through the control
of breath it is possible to get some control over this unseeable
current. But though we bring our body under extreme
control - even to the point of controlling the beats of the heart -
do you think that our ancient sages had only the body and its
powers in view when they first taught our system?"
Whatever I think about the ancient sages and their purpose,
disappears in the intense curiosity which is suddenly aroused in
my mind.
"You can control the working of your heart?" I exclaim
in surprise.
"My self-acting organs, the heart, the stomach and the
kidney, have been brought to some degree of obedience," he
answers quietly, without a trace of boastfulness.
"How do you do that?"
"One gains the power by practising certain combinations of
posture, breathing and will-power exercises. Of course, they
belong to the advanced degrees of Yoga. They are so difficult
that few persons can ever do them. Through these practices
I have conquered somewhat the muscles which work the heart;
and through the heart muscles, I have been able to go on and
conquer the other organs."
"This is indeed extraordinary!"
"You think so? Place your hand upon my chest, just
over the heart, and keep it there." With that, Brama
changes his position, takes up a curious posture, and closes
his eyes.
I obey his command and then wait patiently to see what is
going to happen. For some minutes he remains as steady as
a rock, and almost as motionless. Then the beating of his heart
begins to diminish gradually. I am startled to feel it become
slower and slower. A thrill of eerieness spreads over my nerves\n--- 第92页 ---\n90 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
as I distinctly feel his heart completely stop its rhythmic
functioning. The pause lasts for about seven anxious seconds.
I try to pretend that I am hallucinated, but my nervousness
is such that I know the attempt is useless. As the organ returns
to life from its seeming death, relief seizes me. The beats
begin to quicken and normality is safely reached at length.
The Yogi does not emerge from his motionless self-absorption
till some minutes later. He slowly opens his eyes and asks:
"Did you feel the heart stop? "
"Yes. Most distinctly." I am certain that there was no
hallucination about the feat. What other strange Yogi tricks
can Brama play with his internal mechanism, I wonder?
As if in answer to my unspoken thought, Brama says:
"It is nothing compared with what my master can achieve.
Sever one of his arteries, and he is able to control the flow of
blood; yes, even to stop it! I, too, have brought my blood
under some measure of control, but I cannot do that."
" Can you show me that control? "
He requests me to take his wrist and grip it where I can feel
the flow of blood through his artery. I do so.
Within two or three minutes I become aware that the curious
rhythm which beats under my thumb is lessening. Soon it
comes to a definite halt. Brama has brought his pulse to a
stop!
I anxiously await the resumption of circulation in his artery.
A minute passes but nothing occurs. A second minute, during
which I am acutely conscious of each second, likewise ticks
itself away in my watch. The third minute is equally fruitless.
Not until half-way through the fourth minute do I become
conscious of a faint return to activity within the artery. The
tension is relieved. Before long, the pulse beats at its normal
rate.
"How strange!" I exclaim involuntarily.
"It is nothing," he modestly replies.
"This seems to be a day of strange feats, so will you not
show me another?"
Brama hesitates.
"Only one more," he says at length, " and then you must
be satisfied."
He looks thoughtfully at the floor and then announces:
"I shall stop the breath!"
"But then you will surely die!" I exclaim nervously.
He laughs but ignores the remark.
"Now hold your hand flat under my nostrils."\n--- 第93页 ---\nTHE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH 91
I obey him hesitantly. The warm caress of exhaled air
touches and retouches the skin of my hand. Brama closes his
eyes; his body becomes statuesque in its steadiness. He
appears to fall into a kind of trance. I wait, continuing to hold
the back of my hand immediately under his nose. He remains
as still and as unresponsive as a graven idol. Very slowly, very
evenly, the caress of his breath begins to diminish. Ultimately
it completely ceases.
I watch his nostrils and lips; I examine his shoulders and
chest; but in no single case can I discover any external evidence
of respiration. I know that these tests are not final and wish
to make a more exhaustive test, but how? My brain works
rapidly.
There is no hand-mirror in the room, but I find an excellent
substitute in a small polished brass dish. I hold the dish
under his nostrils for a while, and again in front of his lips.
Its shining surface remains unmarred by any dullness or
moisture.
It seems impossible to believe that in this quiet conventional
house near a quiet conventional city, I have established contact
with something significant, something that Western science
may one day be forced to recognize against its will. But the
evidence is there, and it is indubitable. Yoga is really more
than a worthless myth.
When Brama ultimately emerges from his trance-like condi
tion, he seems a little tired.
"Are you satisfied? " he asks, with a fatigued smile.
"I am more than satisfied! But I am at a loss to understand
in what way you can do it."
"It is forbidden me to explain. The restraint of breath is
a practice which is part of advanced Yoga. To a white man
it may seem a foolish thing to strive for, yet to us it is of much
importance."
"But we have always been taught that man cannot live
without breathing. Surely that is not a foolish idea?"
"It is not foolish; nevertheless it is not true. I can hold
my breath for two hours, if I wish. Many times I have done
that, but I am not yet dead, you see!" Brama smiles.
"I am puzzled. If you are not permitted to explain, perhaps
you can throw a little light upon the theory behind your
practices?"
"Very well. There is a lesson we can draw from watching
certain animals, which is a favoured method of instruction with
my master. An elephant breathes much more slowly than a\n--- 第94页 ---\n92 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
monkey, yet it lives much longer. Some of the large serpents
breathe far more slowly than a dog, yet they live far longer.
Thus, creatures exist which show that slowness of breathing
may possibly prolong age. If you can follow me so far, the
next step will be easier for you to grasp. Now, in the Himalayas,
there are bats which go into winter sleep. They hang suspended
in the mountain caverns for weeks, yet they do not draw a single
breath until they again awaken. The Himalayan bears, too,
will sometimes sink into trance throughout the winter, their
bodies apparently without life. In deep burrows of the
Himalayas, when food cannot be found during the winter, there
are hedgehogs which pass into sleep for some months, a sleep
in which breathing is suspended. If these animals cease to
breathe for a time, and yet live, why should not human beings
be able to do the same?''
His statement of curious facts is interesting, but it is not
so convincing as his demonstration. The common notion that
breathing is an essential function in every condition of life is
not to be thrown aside at a few minutes' notice.
"We Westerners will always find it difficult to understand
how life can continue in a body unless breathing continues
also."
"Life always continues," he answers cryptically. "Death
is but a habit of the body."
"But surely you cannot mean that it may be possible to
conquer death?" I enquire incredulously.
Brama looks at me in a strange manner.
"Why not?" There is a tense pause. His eyes search me,
but they do it in a kindly way.
"Because there are possibilities in you, I shall tell you one
of our old secrets. But I must first demand your agreement
to one condition."
"And that ?"
"You shall not attempt to practise any breathing exercise
as an experiment, except those which I may teach you
later"
"I agree."
"Keep your word, then. Now you have hitherto believed
that the complete stoppage of breathing brings death?"
"Yes."
"Is it not reasonable to believe, also, that the complete
holding of the breath within one's body keeps life within us
for so long as the breath is held, at least?"
"Well------?"\n--- 第95页 ---\nTHE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH 93
"We claim no more than that. We say that an adept in
breath control, who can completely retain his breath at will,
thereby retains his life current. Do you grasp that?"
"I think so."
"Imagine, now, an adept in Yoga who can keep the locked
breath, not merely for a few minutes as a curiosity, but for
weeks, for months and even for years. Since you admit that
where there is breath there must be life, do you not see how
the prospect of prolonged life opens up for man?"
I am dumb. How can I dismiss this assertion as prepos
terous? Yet how can I accept it? Does it not recall to memory
the idle dreams of our European alchemists of medieval times,
dreamers who sought an elixir of life, but who succumbed to the
sickle of death one by one? But if Brama is not self-deceived,
why should he seek to deceive me. He has not sought my
company and he makes no effort to acquire disciples.
A strange fear touches my brain. What if he is merely mad?
No - he seems so sensible and rational in other matters. Would
it not be better to regard him as mistaken? Yet something in
me doubts even that conclusion. I am bewildered.
"Can I not convince you?" He speaks again. "Have you
not heard the story of the faqueer who was buried by Ranjeet
Singh in a vault at Lahore? The burial of the faqueer took
place in the presence of English army officers, while the last
of the Sikh kings watched it himself. The living tomb was
guarded by soldiers for six weeks, but the faqueer emerged
healthy and alive. Enquire into this story, for I have been told
that it is written somewhere in the records of your Government.
This faqueer had brought his breathing under great mastery
and could stop it at will without danger of dying. Yet he was
not even an adept in Yoga, for I have heard from an old man
who knew him when he was alive that his character was not
good. His name was Haridas and he lived in the North. If
this man could live in an airless space for such a long time
without breathing, how much more can be done by the true
masters of Yoga, who practise in secret and will not perform
these marvels for gold?"1
A pregnant silence follows our conversation.
"There exist other strange powers which can be acquired
1 I have since verified this reference and find that the actual
episode occurred in 1837 at Lahore. The faqueer was buried in the
presence of King Ranjit Singh, Sir Claude Wade, Dr. Honigberger,
and others. A guard of Sikh soldiers watched the grave day and
night to prevent fraud. The faqueer was dug up alive forty days
later. Fuller particulars can be found in the archives at Calcutta.\n--- 第96页 ---\n94 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
by the way of our Yoga, but who, in these degenerate days,
will pay the heavy price to obtain them?"
There is another pause.
"We who live and work in the everyday world have sufficient
to do without seeking such powers," I venture, in defence of
my epoch.
"Yes," agrees Brama, "this path of Body Control is only
for the few. Therefore the teachers of our science have kept
it a silent secret through the centuries. It is not often that
they seek after pupils; pupils must seek after them."
§
The next time we meet, Brama visits my quarters. It is
evening and we soon adjourn for dinner. After the meal and
a short rest, we go out on the moonlit veranda where I plant
myself in a deck chair, while the Yogi finds a mat on the floor
more comfortable.
For several minutes we silently enjoy the bright radiance of
the full moon.
As I have not forgotten the astonishing events of our last
meeting, it is not long before I broach anew this incredible
matter of men who snap their fingers at death.
"Why not?" Brama asks his favourite question. "There
is an adept in our Yoga of Body Control who is hidden among
the Neilgherry Hills, here in the South. He never stirs from
his retreat. In the North, there lives another whose home is
a cave upon the snowy Himalayas. These men you cannot
meet, for they disdain this world, yet their existence is a
tradition among us and we are told that they have extended
their lives to hundreds of years."
"You really believe this?" I exclaim in deferential
doubt.
"Without a doubt! Have I not the visible example of my
own master?"
A question which has been on my mind for many days,
presses itself to the fore again. Hitherto I have hesitated in
voicing it, but now that our friendship has come so close I
decide to give the query a bold outlet. I look earnestly at the
Yogi and ask him:
"Brama, who is your master?"
For a while he returns my gaze, but yields no answer. He
looks at me hesitatingly.\n--- 第97页 ---\nTHE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH 95
When he speaks, his voice is slow and grave:
"He is known to his Southern disciples as Yerumbu Swami,
meaning The Ant Teacher."
"What a curious name! " I exclaim involuntarily.
"My master always carries a bag of rice powder from which
he feeds the ants wherever he may be. But in the North and
among the Himalayan villages where he sometimes stays, he
bears another name."
"Is he, then, perfect in your Yoga of Body Control?"
"Even so."
"And you believe that he has lived ?"
"I believe that he is over four hundred years old!" Brama
quietly finishes the sentence for me.
There is a tense pause.
I stare at him in bewilderment.
"Many a time he has described to me what happened during
the reigns of the Moghul Emperors," supplements the Yogi.
"And he has told me stories of the days when your English
India Company first came to Madras."
Sceptical Western ears are unable to accept these statements.
"But any child who has read a history book could tell you
such things," I counter.
Brama ignores my remark. He goes on:
"My master remembers clearly the first battle of Panipat1
and he has not forgotten the days of the battle of Plassey.2
I recollect how he once referred to a brother disciple, one
Beshudananda, as a mere child of eighty years!"
In the clear moonlight I notice that Brama's swarthy, broad-
nosed countenance remains peculiarly unmoved while he
utters these strange words. How can my brain, nurtured in
the strict methods of inquiry which modern science has called
forth, entertain such assertions? After all, Brama is a Hindu
and must possess some of the legend-swallowing ability of his
people. It is useless to contend with him; I shall remain silent.
The Yogi continues:
"For more than eleven years my master was spiritual
adviser to one of the old Maharajahs of Nepal, the State which
lies between India and Tibet. There he is known and loved
by some of the village people, who dwell among the Himalayan
1 In 1526, the invading army of Baber, a descendant of the ruthless
Tamerlane, and the forces of the King of Agra met in conflict at
Panipat.
2 This famous battle, which opened the British path to power in
India, occurred in 1757.\n--- 第98页 ---\n96 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
mountains. They revere him as a god when he visits them,
yet he talks to them in a kindly way, in the manner of a father
talking to his children. He gives no heed to caste rules, and he
eats neither fish nor meat"
"How is it possible for a man to live so long?" My thoughts
involuntarily voice themselves again.
Brama looks away, seems to forget my presence.
"There are three ways in which this is possible. The first is
to practise all the postures, all the breathing exercises and all the
secret exercises which comprise our system of Body Control.
This practice must take place until one is perfect, which can
be done only under a proper master who can show you in his
own body what he teaches. The second way is to partake
regularly of some rare herbs which are known only to the adepts
who have studied this matter. These adepts carry the herbs
secretly, or hide them in their robes when travelling. When
the time arrives for the final disappearance of such an adept,
he selects a worthy disciple, makes the secret known to him,
and presents him with the herbs. To none else are they
given. The third way is not easy to explain." Brama stops
abruptly.
"Will you not try?" I urge.
"It is possible that you will laugh at my words."
I assure him that, on the contrary, I shall treat his explanation
with due respect.
"Very well. There exists a tiny hole inside the brain of
man.1 Within this hole dwells the soul. There is also a kind of
valve which protects this hole. At the bottom of the spine
there comes into being the unseeable life-current which I have
mentioned to you more than once. The constant loss of this
current causes the body to grow old, but its control fills the
flesh with new life and perpetuates it. When a man has
conquered himself, he can begin to get this control by certain
practices which are known only to advanced Yogis of our
school. And when he can withdraw this life-current up his
spine, he may then try to concentrate it into the hole in the
brain. But, unless he finds a master who will assist him to
open the protecting valve, he cannot succeed. If he finds a
master who is willing to do this, then the unseeable current
will enter the hole and turn into the Nectar of Longevity, as
we name it. It is no easy task, for ruin waits in ambush for the
man who attempts it alone. But the man who succeeds can
1 It is possible that Brama refers to the cavity caused by the four
inter-communicating ventricles of the brain, but I am not sure.\n--- 第99页 ---\nTHE YOGA WHICH CONQUERS DEATH 97
induce a condition similar to death whenever he pleases, and
so obtains the victor's power when real death seeks him out.
In fact, he can choose the exact moment of his death at any
time, and to the severest examination he will appear to have
died naturally. One who has all these three methods at his
command can live for many hundred years. So have I been
taught. Even when he dies, the worms will refrain from
attacking his body. A century later his flesh will still be free
from decay."
I thank Brama for his explanation, but I wonder. I am
profoundly interested, but I am not convinced. Anatomy
does not know this current of which he talks, and it has
certainly never known his Nectar. Are these stories of physio
logical marvels mere superstitious misunderstandings? With
them one returns to the age of fable, the ancient days of long-
lived wizards and magicians who hold the elixir of life. Yet
the demonstrations of breath and blood control which Brama
has given me provide some assurance that Yogic powers are
not mere chimeras, that these powers can undoubtedly be
responsible for the performance of feats which must appear
fabulous to the uninitiated. Beyond this point I find it
difficult to walk with him.1
I remain respectfully silent, careful not to allow my intellectual
struggles betray themselves on my face.
"Such powers as these would be much desired by men who
are nearing the grave," Brama resumes, "but forget not that
the way to them is full of danger. Can you wonder that our
masters say of these exercises: 'Keep them as secret as you
would keep a box of diamonds.'"
"So you are unlikely to reveal them to me?"
"Those who wish to become adepts should first learn to
walk before they try to run? " he replies, with a faint smile.
"A last question, Brama."
The Yogi nods.
"Where is your master now living?"
"He has entered a temple retreat in the mountains of Nepal,
on the yonder side of the Terai jungle."
1 The entire conversation, with its amazing statements and cool
assertions, now seems like a fantastic dream. My attempt to transfer
it to paper is a task which, more than once, makes me contemplate
omitting it completely from this book as I have perforce to omit many
other conversations. I do not doubt but that it will cause many
superior European lips to curl in contempt of Asiatic superstition.
If I finally let it pass into publication, it is at the bidding of other
judgments than mine.\n--- 第100页 ---\n98 A SEARCH IN SECRET INDIA
"Is he likely to return to the plains again?"
"Who can foretell his movements? He may remain in
Nepal for many years, or he may begin his travels again. He
likes Nepal best because our school of Yoga flourishes better
there than in India. You see, even the teaching of Body
Control differs with different schools. And ours is the Tantra
school, which is better understood in the atmosphere of Nepal
than among the Hindus."
Brama reverts to silence. I guess that he is dwelling in
devoted thought upon this enigmatic figure of his master.
Ah! if these things I have heard to-night are more real than
legendary, then, indeed, one may catch a glimpse of what is
around the corner - Man, Ageless and Immortal!
§
If I do not hurry my pen, this chapter will never be brought
to a close. Therefore I shall endeavour to transfix the last
memorable scene of my association with the Yogi of the five
names.
The Indian night comes quickly on the heels of evening;
there are no lingering sunsets as in Europe. And as the swift
dusk begins to descend on his garden hut, Brama lights an oil
lantern and suspends it by a cord from the roof. We settle
down anew.
The old widow discreetly slips away and leaves me alone
with the Yogi and the student-teacher who translates our
words. The odour of burning incense touches the room with
a mystical atmosphere.
This evening sad thoughts of parting steal over me. I try
to brush them off, but fail. I cannot clearly tell this man,
through the irritating barrier of speaking through a third person,
what is in my heart. How far the novel facts and strange
theories he has put forward are correct, I am little able to say,
but I have appreciated his readiness to let me enter his solitary
existence; I have felt at times that our hearts have drawn
sympathetically near to each other; and I know now what it
has meant to him to break his habitual reserve.
To-night I have made a last attempt, under the shadow of
impending departure, to induce him to reveal his deeper secrets.
"Are you ready to abandon the life of cities and to retire
into a solitary place in the hills or the jungle for some years?"
he asks me, searchingly.