\n--- 第1页 ---\nS
PIRITUAL
S
TORIES
AS TOLD BY
R M
AMANA AHARSHI
SSSSS
RRRRRIIIII
RRRRR
AAAAAMMMMMAAAAANNNNNAAAAASSSSSRRRRRAAAAAMMMMMAAAAAMMMMM
TTTTT
IIIIIRRRRRUUUUUVVVVVAAAAANNNNNNNNNNAAAAAMMMMMAAAAALLLLLAAAAAIIIII
22222000000000011111\n--- 第2页 ---\n© Sri Ramanasramam
Tiruvannamalai
Fifth edition 1999 - 1000 copies
Sixth (revised) edition 2001 - 2000 copies
CC No: 1058
ISBN: 81-88018-35-X
Price: Rs.
Published by
V. S. RAMANAN
President, Board of Trustees
SRI RAMANASRAMAM
Tiruvannamalai 606 603
S. India
Typeset at:
Sri Ramanasramam
Offset by:
Kartik Offset Printers
Madras - 600 015\n--- 第3页 ---\nPPPPPRRRRREEEEEFFFFFAAAAACCCCCEEEEE
The mind seeks to define the infinite. In doing so it has
used its own resources to bring down Supreme Truth in a simple
and yet potent language. Scattered throughout the religious
scriptures of India, parables and stories abound, weaving a
colourful thread around the most profound spiritual truths of
mankind. Handed down from parent to child these religious
treasures of India remain a relevant force today.
Sivaprakasam Pillai, one of the earliest devotees to recognise
the spiritual greatness of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi,
commented “Sri Ramana Bhagavan has attained the state of
Brahman without knowing the word Brahman.” For it was not
until years later, that books were brought to Sri Bhagavan by
devotees, describing the very state he himself had intuitively
experienced. With his pure and retentive memory, he retained
the essence of all these books at a glance, and brought forth at a
moment’s notice, the perfect story or parable suitable to the
occasion. In Sri Ramana’s own words the beauty and wisdom
contained in such stories are made ever more beautiful and the
essence made even clearer.
Sri Bhagavan would not only tell the story but would act
out the part to the delight of his devotees. If the story was
particularly moving, tears would flow freely from his eyes. “Such
was the attraction of these stories”, Kunju Swami related, “that
when we heard Sri Bhagavan beginning a story, even if we had
heard it numerous times before, we would literally stop whatever
we were doing and run to his side to hear it again!” S. S. Cohen
in Guru Ramana relates, “Bhagavan was reciting from memory
a poem of a Vaishnava Saint, in which occurred the words,
‘Fold me in Thy embrace, O Lord’, whereupon the arms of\n--- 第4页 ---\nBhagavan joined in a circle round the vacant air in front of
him, while his eyes shone with devotional fervour and his voice
shook with stifled sobs which did not escape our notice. It was
fascinating to see him acting the parts he related, and being in
such exhilarated moods as these.” On another occasion while
Bhagavan was reading and explaining a story about Tara Vilasam
his eyes became full of tears and his voice became tremulous. It
looked as if the whole drama was being enacted in his presence.
Noticing this Suri Nagamma remarked, “Bhagavan appears to
have been transformed into Tara herself.” Pulling himself
together the master said with a smile, “What to do? I identify
myself with whosoever is before me, I have no separate identity.
I am universal.”
At the suggestion of Mrs. Lucia Osborne, we have included
the incidents which inspired Sri Bhagavan to relate the story. A
few new stories have been added, along with a glossary of
Sanskrit and Tamil words. Special thanks must be made to
Sri S.Tyagarajan who with great care went over the entire
manuscript with Sri Kunju Swamigal. Sri Kunju Swamigal’s
unfailing enthusiasm and keen interest helped us greatly.
With deepest salutations this little work is offered to
Sri Bhagavan, whose guidance, grace and love has prompted
this collection of stories. We pray for the grace and blessings of
Bhagavan Sri Ramana. May his words inspire us to turn within.
Sri Ramanasramam Joan Greenblatt
August 5, 1984\n--- 第5页 ---\nFFFFFOOOOORRRRREEEEEWWWWWOOOOORRRRRDDDDD
Everyone knows that Sri Bhagavan Ramana was a master
story teller! Sri Ramanasramam publications, like Letters, Day
by Day, and Talks, abound with marvellous accounts of how
Bhagavan picturesquely narrated, rather enacted, incidents that
took place in the lives of sages and saints and traditional stories
of great spiritual content, like the story of Sage Ribhu.
Seeing how the first edition of this book was serving
devotees, the compiler, Mrs. Joan Greenblatt, worked one-
pointed to enlarge and improve it; the result is the excellent
second edition now in your hand!
We hope all seekers will find this book both interesting
and enlightening and partake of the Spiritual Presence which
lies within its pages and the abundant grace of the narrator Sri
Ramana Himself!
Sri Ramanasramam Sri T. N. Venkataraman
Maha Sivarathri President, Board of Trustees
17.2.85\n--- 第7页 ---\nCCCCCOOOOONNNNNTTTTTEEEEENNNNNTTTTTSSSSS
Page No.
PREFACE .. .. iii
FOREWORD .. .. v
CONTENTS .. .. vii
V S & T
ARIOUS TORIES ALES
Self-Surrender .. .. 3
The Jnani and the Siddha .. .. 6
Twentyfour Gurus .. .. 8
Enter the Heart .. .. 9
Buddha .. .. 10
The Sadhu and the Three Stones .. .. 12
Initiation .. .. 15
Peace is the Sole Criterion .. .. 16
The Garlic Plant .. .. 17
‘I’ and You .. .. 19
Earnestness or Faith (Sraddha) .. .. 21
In the World but not of the World .. .. 22
Total Abidance .. .. 25
Quiet Piety .. .. 26
Unknown Tenth Man .. .. 27
God Works for His devotee .. .. 29
Each Reflects His Own Nature .. .. 29
The Master’s Payment .. .. 30
The Fault Lies in Exposure .. .. 30
Brahmachari’s Touch .. .. 31
The King and His Ministers .. .. 32
The Greatness of Japa .. .. 34
Silent Eloquence .. .. 36
Headship of a Mutt .. .. 37
Bhakta Ekanath .. .. 40
The Immature Pot .. .. 42
Tapo Bhrashta .. .. 45
Yogi’s Penance .. .. 46
Brahmin’s Curse .. .. 47
Kabir ... .. 49\n--- 第8页 ---\nPage No.
Kamal, Son of Saint Kabir ... .. 50
Mutual Curse ... .. 53
The Lord Himself Comes ... .. 55
Deliverance of a Thorn Bush ... .. 57
B , V , S
RAHMA ISHNU IVA
Silence is the True Upadesa ... .. 63
Dakshinamurti ... .. 65
Brahma’s Pride ... .. 67
Sweet of Speech ... .. 69
Parvati’s Test ... .. 70
Going Round the Self ... .. 71
Ardhanareeswara ... .. 73
P
ERIAPURANAM
The Fire of Devotion ... .. 81
Mother’s Blessings ... .. 85
The Lord is Within Me ... .. 87
Pilgrimage to Sri Arunachala ... .. 89
Sambandhar and Appar ... .. 94
Saint Appar ... .. 97
There is Nothing Without ... .. 100
With the Moon in His Crown ... .. 101
Swami is Everywhere ... .. 104
Sundaramurthi’s Bond of Servitude ... .. 106
Manikkavachakar ... .. 111
How the Tiruvachakam was Written ... .. 116
Y V
OGA ASISHTAM
Brahma, the Creator ... .. 121
The Charm of Self-realisation ... .. 123
Alms for a King ... .. 126
Universal Equality ... .. 127
One Pointedness ... .. 129
The Siddhas’ Lesson ... .. 130
GLOSSARY ... .. 131
Important Events in Sri Bhagavan’s Life ... .. 137\n--- 第9页 ---\nVarious
Stories & Tales
Sri Bhagavan became transformed while relating incidents from
his vast collection of stories and tales. On one occasion while
describing Gautama’s joy at Goddess Parvati’s coming to his
Ashram, Sri Bhagavan could not go on, for tears filled his eyes
and emotion choked his voice. Trying to hide his plight from
others, he remarked, “I don’t know how people who perform
Harikatha explain such passages to audiences and manage to
do it without breaking down. I suppose they must make their
hearts hard like stone before starting their work.”\n--- 第11页 ---\n3
SSSSS -----SSSSS
EEEEELLLLLFFFFF UUUUURRRRRRRRRREEEEENNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRR
D: I fear that Self-realisation is no easy thing to attain.
M: Why impede yourself by anticipating failure? Push
on. Self-realisation will come to an earnest seeker in a trice.
To illustrate this, Sri Bhagavan told the following story:
KING JANAKA WAS listening to a philosophical treatise read
by the state pandit, wherein a passage occurred to the effect that
a rider who had placed one foot in the stirrup, contemplating
upon realisation could realise the Self before he lifted the other
foot to place it in the other stirrup. That is, the passage taught,
that when realisation comes, it comes in an instant. The king
stopped the pandit from proceeding further, and ordered him
to prove the statement. The pandit admitted that he was only a
book-worm and was unable to impart practical wisdom. Janaka
suggested that the text was either false or exaggerated, but the
pandit would not agree to this. Though he himself was unable
to impart practical wisdom, he maintained that the text could
not be false or exaggerated, since it contained the words of wise
sages of the past. Janaka was annoyed with the pandit and in a
fit of rage condemned him to prison. He then inflicted the
same punishment on every pandit who passed for a wise man
but was unable to prove this scriptural text.
For fear of being imprisoned, some of the pandits fled the
country in voluntary exile. While two or three of them were running
through a thick forest, a sage called Ashtavakra,* who though young
* Ashta means ‘eight’ and vakra means ‘bends’. Ashtavakra was so named
because his body had eight deformities.\n--- 第12页 ---\n4
in age was wise in learning, happened to cross their path. Having
learnt their plight, Ashtavakra offered to prove the text true to the
king and thereby have the imprisoned pandits released. Impressed
by his bold assurance, they took him in a palanquin to the king. At
the sight of the sage, the king stood up and saluted him with great
reverence. Ashtavakra then ordered the king to release all the pandits.
Janaka thought that such an order could come only from one who
had the capacity to set his doubts at rest, and hence he released all
the pandits and asked the sage whether he could summon the horse.
The sage advised him not to be in a hurry and suggested that they
should go to a solitary spot. Thereupon the king on his horse and
the sage in a palanquin went out of the city towards the forest.
When they reached the forest the sage asked the king to send back
the retinue. The king did as he was asked, and then placing one of
his feet in the stirrup, he requested the sage to prove the scriptural
text. But the sage replied by asking whether the position in which
they stood indicated a proper master-disciple relationship. The king
then understood that he should show due reverence towards
Ashtavakra, and prayed to him for grace. The sage then addressed
him as ‘Janaka’, since he was no longer a king and told him that
before being taught Brahma jnana, a true disciple should surrender
himself and all his possessions to his Master. “So be it”, said the
king. “So be it” replied the sage and disappeared into the forest.
From that moment Janaka stood transfixed with one foot in the
stirrup and the other dangling in the air, as if he were a statue.
(Saying this, Sri Bhagavan imitated the posture of King Janaka).
Time passed by, and the citizens, finding no sign of their king
returning, grew anxious and began to search for him. They came
to the place where Janaka was standing transfixed and were dismayed
to find him unaware of their presence and indifferent to their
earnest enquiries. They therefore began searching for Ashtavakra
who, they thought, must be a charlatan that had cast a spell upon
their king, and vowed vengeance upon him. At the same time,\n--- 第13页 ---\n5
being concerned with the king’s condition and wanting to minister
to him, they brought him back to the city on a palanquin. The
king, however, continued to remain in the same condition.
At last, having found Ashtavakra, the ministers entreated
him to remove the alleged spell and bring the king back to his
normal condition. At the same time they charged him with the
responsibility for having cast the spell. Ashtavakra treated their
ignorant remarks with contempt and called the name of Janaka,
who immediately saluted him, and responded to his call. The
ministers were surprised. Ashtavakra told the king that he was
being maliciously accused by the people of having brought him
to some sad plight and asked him to tell the truth. On hearing
this, the king angrily asked, ‘Who said so’? The ministers were
taken by surprise and pleaded for mercy. Thereupon, the sage
advised the king to resume his normal functions, adding that
Brahma jnana could be taught only to competent persons and
that since the king had successfully passed the test, he would
now impart it to him. Then the sage remained alone with the
king during the night and taught him the ultimate Truth, saying
“Brahman is not anything new or apart from oneself and no
particular time or place is needed to realise It.” He finally
concluded by saying, “That Thou Art” (tat tvam asi). That is
the Self, eternal and infinite.
The next morning the ministers found that the king called
the assembly and performed his functions as usual. In the
assembled court Ashtavakra asked the king whether his former
doubt about whether Brahma jnana could be attained as suddenly
and as quickly as mentioned in the scriptures was cleared, and if
so to bring the horse and demonstrate the truth of it.
The king was all humility now and said, “Lord! Because of
my immaturity, I doubted the correctness of the scriptural text.
I now realise every letter of it is true.” The ministers thanked
the sage.\n--- 第14页 ---\n6
TTTTT JJJJJ SSSSS
HHHHHEEEEE NNNNNAAAAANNNNNIIIII AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE IIIIIDDDDDDDDDDHHHHHAAAAA
One day, while speaking about hatha yoga and related
subjects, Sri Bhagavan narrated the following story from
Prabhulingalila, a well-known Tamil work by the Sage
Sivaprakasa Swamigal.
PRABHULINGA, THE FOUNDER of the Lingayat sect (now
mostly prevalent in Karnataka State only), was touring the land
for the uplift of the spiritually minded. He met the famous Yogi
Gorakhnath in Gokarnam (a famous place of Hindu pilgrimage
on the west coast of India). The yogi welcomed him respectfully,
but was however, proudly conscious of his own extraordinary
powers over the elements. He considered his guest more or less
his equal, expressed pleasure at meeting him, and upon greeting
him, asked who he was.
Prabhulinga replied that only the One who had destroyed
his ego, root and branch, and who had thereby realised himself
could know who he was, and wondered what he could say to a
non-entity, a person, who clung to his perishable body.
Gorakhnath, who identified his body as himself, replied,
“That person alone who has gained the immortality of the body,
by the favour of Siva and consumption of gulikas (medicinal
herbs), will never die. Therefore one who had not gained such
immortality dies.”
Prabhulinga remarked that knowledge consists in realizing
one’s Self and not in immortalising the body and went on to
explain at length that the body cannot be the real Self. However,
Gorakhnath could not be persuaded and would not budge an\n--- 第15页 ---\n7
inch from his ground; he proudly challenged Prabhulinga to
try cutting his body, handing him a long, bright and sharp
sword. When the sword struck the body of Gorakhnath, it caused
him no injury but was itself blunted. Prabhulinga feigned
surprise, and asked Gorakhnath to try cutting his body. At first
Gorakhnath hesitated to do so saying that Prabhulinga would
die. But when Prabhulinga insisted, he took up the sword and
tried to cut his body. To the great surprise of Gorakhnath, the
sword passed easily through the body of Prabhulinga without
affecting it in any way. It was as if the sword was passing through
empty space! Only then was Gorakhnath, the Siddha, ready to
acknowledge the superiority of Prabhulinga, the Jnani. Thus
his pride was humbled, and he prayed to Prabhulinga, to teach
him the truth. Prabhulinga then expounded Brahma vidya to
Gorakhnath as follows: “Gorakhnath, do not think your body
to be your Self. Seek the In-dweller (the cave-dweller) and you
will once for all rid yourself of the disease of birth and death.
The cave is your heart only, the In-dweller thereof is called God
and I am That.”\n--- 第16页 ---\n8
TTTTT GGGGG
WWWWWEEEEENNNNNTTTTTYYYYYFFFFFOOOOOUUUUURRRRR UUUUURRRRRUUUUUSSSSS
A KING WAS passing through a forest in all pomp and
pageantry, with his army and retinue behind him. He came
across a man with not even a cod-piece on, lying on the ground,
with one leg cocked over the other. He was laughing away,
apparently supremely happy, contented with himself and all
the world. The king was struck with the man’s happy state and
sent for him. But when the king’s men approached the nude
ascetic and delivered the king’s message, he took absolutely
no notice and continued in his ascetic bliss. On being told of
this, the king himself went to the man and even then the man
took no notice. Thereupon it struck the king that this must
be no common man, and said, ‘Swami, you are evidently
supremely happy. May we know what is the secret of such
happiness and from which guru you learnt it?’ Thereupon the
ascetic told the king, ‘I have had twentyfour gurus. Everything,
this body, the earth, the birds, some instruments, some persons,
all have taught me’. All the things in the world may be classed
as either good or bad. The good taught him what he must
seek. Similarly, the bad taught him what he must avoid. The
ascetic was Dattatreya, the avadhuta.\n--- 第17页 ---\n9
EEEEE HHHHH
NNNNNTTTTTEEEEERRRRR TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE EEEEEAAAAARRRRRTTTTT
A devotee who had suddenly lost his only son came to
Bhagavan in a state of acute grief, seeking relief. He asked a
few questions in which his grief was evident. Bhagavan, as
usual, asked him to enquire into the Self and find out who is
grieving. The devotee was not satisfied. Bhagavan then said,
“All right. I will tell you a story from Vichara Sagaram. Listen”.
TWO YOUNGSTERS BY name Rama and Krishna, told their
respective parents that they would go to foreign countries to
prosecute further studies and then earn a lot of money. After
some time, one of them died suddenly. The other studied well,
earned a lot and was living happily. Some time later the one that
was alive requested a merchant who was going to his native place
to tell his father that he was wealthy and happy and that the other
boy who had come with him had passed away. Instead of passing
on the information correctly, the merchant told the father of the
person who was alive, that his son was dead, and the father of the
person that was dead, that his son had earned a lot of money and
was living happily. The parents of the person that was actually
dead, were happy in the thought that their son would come back
after some time, while the parents of the person whose son was
alive, but was reported to be dead, were in great grief. In fact,
neither of them saw their son but they were experiencing happiness
or grief according to the reports they received. That is all. We too
are similarly situated. We believe all sorts of things that the mind
tells us and get deluded into thinking that what exists does not
exist and that what does not exist exists. If we do not believe the
mind but enter the heart and see the son that is inside, there is no
need to see the children outside.\n--- 第18页 ---\n10
BBBBB
UUUUUDDDDDDDDDDHHHHHAAAAA
During a conversation on non-attachment, Bhagavan
said, “In this part of the country, one of our ancients wrote,
‘O Lord, thou hast given me a hand to use as pillow under
my head, a cloth to cover my loins, hands wherewith to eat
food, what more do I want? This is my great good fortune’!
That is the purport of the verse. Is it really possible to say
how great a good fortune that is? Even the greatest kings
wish for such happiness. There is nothing to equal it. Having
experienced both these conditions, I know the difference
between this and that. These beds, sofa and articles around
me – all this is bondage.”
“Is not the Buddha an example of this?” asked a devotee.
Thereupon Sri Bhagavan began speaking about Buddha.
“YES,” SAID BHAGAVAN, “when the Buddha was in the
palace with all possible luxuries in the world, he was still sad.
To remove his sadness, his father created more luxuries than
ever. But none of them satisfied the Buddha. At midnight he
left his wife and child and disappeared. He remained in great
austerity for six years, realised the Self; and for the welfare of
the world became a mendicant (bhikshu). It was only after he
became a mendicant that he enjoyed great bliss. Really, what
more did he require?”
“In the garb of a mendicant he came to his own city, did
he not?” asked a devotee.
“Yes, yes,” said Bhagavan. “Having heard that he was
coming, his father, Suddhodana, decorated the royal elephant\n--- 第19页 ---\n11
and went out with his whole army to receive him on the main
road. But without touching the main road, the Buddha came
by side roads and by-lanes; he sent his close associates to the
various streets for alms while he himself in the guise of a
mendicant went by another way to his father. How could the
father know that his son was coming in that guise! Yasodhara
(the Buddha’s wife), however, recognised him, made her son
prostrate before his father and herself prostrated. After that, the
father recognised the Buddha. Suddhodana however, had never
expected to see his son in such a state and was very angry and
shouted, ‘Shame on you! What is this garb? Does one who should
have the greatest of riches come like this? I’ve had enough of it!’
And with that, he looked furiously at the Buddha. Regretting
that his father had not yet got rid of his ignorance, the Buddha
too, began to look at his father with even greater intensity. In
this war of looks, the father was defeated. He fell at the feet of
his son and himself became a mendicant. Only a man with
non-attachment can know the power of non-attachment”, said
Bhagavan, his voice quivering with emotion.\n--- 第20页 ---\n12
TTTTT SSSSS
HHHHHEEEEE AAAAADDDDDHHHHHUUUUU AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE
TTTTT SSSSS
HHHHHRRRRREEEEEEEEEE TTTTTOOOOONNNNNEEEEESSSSS
In 1949 the inauguration of Mother’s Temple took place,
and the dedicated labour of ten years was consecrated in Sri
Bhagavan’s presence. In front of the Matrubhuteswara Shrine,
the Jubilee Hall was built to accommodate the ever-increasing
number of devotees. A large granite couch was installed with
elaborate carvings, spread with a silken mattress for Bhagavan’s
comfort. As a big pillow was placed on one side for Bhagavan to
keep his arms, another behind him to lean against and a third
one at his feet, the actual seating space was considerably reduced.
One day when Suri Nagamma entered the hall Sri Bhagavan
said, looking at his attendants, “See how this mattress slips from
one side to another! People think that it will be comfortable for
Bhagavan if there is a costly mattress. It is, however, not possible
to sit on this restfully. Why this? It would be much more
comfortable if I sat on the stone seat itself. As told in the story
about the sadhu, people think that Swami is undergoing great
hardship when he lives in a thatched shed and lies on a stone
bench, and so they make a fuss. It will perhaps be better if, like
that sadhu in the story, I gather some stones similar to those I
had in the Virupaksha Cave, take them to whichever place I
go, and spread them on a mattress like this.”
A devotee asked, “What is that story of the sadhu which
Bhagavan has now mentioned?” Whereupon Bhagavan
began relating the following story.
A GREAT MAHATMA was living as a sadhu under a tree in a
forest. He always used to keep with him three stones. While\n--- 第21页 ---\n13
sleeping, he used to keep one of them under the head, another
under the waist and the third under the legs and cover himself
with a sheet. When it rained, the body used to be on the stones
and so the water would flow underneath, and the water that fell
on the sheet too, would flow down. So there was no disturbance
to his sleep; he used to sleep soundly. When sitting, he used to
keep the three stones together like a hearth and sit upon them
comfortably. Hence snakes and other reptiles did not trouble
him nor did he trouble them, for they used to crawl through the
slits under the stones. Somebody used to bring him food and he
would eat it. And so, there was nothing for him to worry about.
A king, who came to that forest for hunting, saw this sadhu
and felt, ‘What a pity! How much must he be suffering by having
to adjust his body suitably to those stones and sleep thereon. I will
take him home and keep him with me for at least one or two days
and make him feel comfortable’. So thinking, he went home and
sent two of his soldiers with a palanquin and bearers, with
instructions to invite the sadhu respectfully and bring him to his
palace. He also said that if they did not succeed in bringing the
sadhu, they would be punished. They came and saw the sadhu and
told him that the king had ordered them to bring him to the palace
and that he should come. When he showed disinclination to go
with them, they said that they would be punished if they returned
without him. So they begged of him to come, if only to save them
from trouble. As he did not want them to get into trouble on his
account, he agreed to go with them. What was there for him to
pack up? A kaupeenam, a sheet and those three stones. He folded
and kept the kaupeenam in that sheet, kept those three stones also
in the sheet and tied them together. ‘What is this? This Swami is
bringing with him some stones when he is going to a Raja’s palace!
Is he mad or what?’ thought those soldiers. Anyway, he got into the
palanquin with his bundle and came to the king. The Raja saw the
bundle, and thinking it contained some personal effects, took him\n--- 第22页 ---\n14
into the palace with due respect, feasted him properly and arranged
a tape cot with a mattress of silk cotton to sleep upon. The sadhu
opened his bundle, took out the three stones, spread them on the
bed, covered himself with the sheet and slept as usual.
The next morning the king came, bowed to him with
respect and asked, “Swami, is it comfortable for you here?”
Swami: “Yes. What is there wanting here? I am always happy.”
King: “That is not it, Swami. You were experiencing
hardships in the forest by having to sleep on those stones. Here
this bed and this house must be giving you happiness. That is
why I am asking.”
Swami: “The bed that was there is here also. The bed that
is here is there also. So I have the same happiness everywhere.
There is nothing wanting at any time, either in regard to my
sleep or to my happiness.”
The king was puzzled and looked at the cot. He saw that the
three stones were on it. Whereupon, the king immediately prostrated
himself before the sadhu and said, “Oh great man! Without knowing
your greatness I brought you here with the intention of making you
happy. I did not know that you are always in a state of happiness, and
so I behaved in this foolish manner. Please excuse me and bless me.”
After making up for his mistake in this way, he allowed the sadhu to
go his way. This is the story of the sadhu.
“So, in the eyes of Mahatmas, the free life is the real happy
life?” asked that devotee. “What else? Life in big buildings like
this is like prison life. Only I may be an ‘A’ class prisoner. When
I sit on mattresses like these, I feel that I am sitting on prickly
pears. Where is peace and comfort?” said Bhagavan.
Next day that mattress was taken away and the usual mattress
was spread on the couch. Even so, several people thought that it
might be better to leave Bhagavan to a free life like that of the
sadhu. But Bhagavan had to stay there alone, like a parrot in the
cage of the devotees, because the devotees never leave him free.\n--- 第23页 ---\n15
IIIII
NNNNNIIIIITTTTTIIIIIAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
A devotee asked, “Can anyone get any benefit by
repeating sacred syllables (mantras) picked up casually?”
Sri Bhagavan replied, “No. He must be competent and
initiated in such mantras.” To illustrate this he told the
following story.
A KING VISITED his minister in his residence. There he was
told that the minister was engaged in repetition of sacred syllables
(japa). The king waited for him and, on meeting him, asked
what the japa was. The minister said that it was the holiest of all,
Gayatri. The king desired to be initiated by the minister but the
minister confessed his inability to initiate him. Therefore the
king learned it from someone else, and meeting the minister
later he repeated the Gayatri and wanted to know if it was right.
The minister said that the mantra was correct, but it was not
proper for him to say it. When pressed for an explanation the
minister called to a page close by and ordered him to take hold
of the king. The order was not obeyed. The order was often
repeated, and still not obeyed. The king flew into a rage and
ordered the same man to hold the minister, and it was
immediately done. The minister laughed and said that the
incident was the explanation required by the king. “How?” asked
the king. The minister replied, “The order was the same and
the executor also, but the authority was different. When I
ordered, the effect was nil whereas, when you ordered, there
was immediate effect. Similarly with mantras.”\n--- 第24页 ---\n16
PPPPP SSSSS CCCCC
EEEEEAAAAACCCCCEEEEE IIIIISSSSS TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE OOOOOLLLLLEEEEE RRRRRIIIIITTTTTEEEEERRRRRIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
When asked about the characteristics of a jnani,
Bhagavan said, “They are described in books, such as the
Bhagavad Gita, but we must bear in mind that the jnani’s
state is one which transcends the mind. It cannot be described
by the mind. Only Silence can correctly describe this state
and its characteristics. Silence is more effective than speech.
From Silence came the ego, from the ego came thought, and
from thought came speech. So if speech is effective, how much
more effective must be its original source!” Then, in this
connection Sri Bhagavan related the following story.
TATTVARAYA COMPOSED A bharani (a kind of poetic
composition in Tamil) in honour of his Guru Swarupananda
and convened an assembly of learned pandits to hear the work
and assess its value. The pandits raised the objection that a bharani
was only composed in honour of great heroes capable of killing a
thousand elephants, and that it was not in order to compose such
a work in honour of an ascetic. Thereupon the author said, “Let
us all go to my guru and we shall have this matter settled there.”
They went to the guru and, after all had taken their seats, the
author told his guru the purpose of their coming there. The guru
sat silent and all the others also remained in mauna. The whole
day passed, night came, and some more days and nights, and yet
all sat there silently, no thought at all occurring to any of them
and nobody asked why they had come there. After three or four
days like this, the guru moved his mind a bit, and thereupon the
assembly regained their thought activity. They then declared,
“Conquering a thousand elephants is nothing compared to the
guru’s power to conquer the rutting elephants of all our egos put
together. So certainly he deserves the bharani in his honour!”\n--- 第25页 ---\n17
TTTTT GGGGG PPPPP
HHHHHEEEEE AAAAARRRRRLLLLLIIIIICCCCC LLLLLAAAAANNNNNTTTTT
While Bhagavan was perusing the monthly journal
Grihalakshmi he began to laugh and handed the journal to
Suri Nagamma as she was leaving the hall, saying, “The
greatness of garlic is described in it. Please read it.” The
article contained recipes for making chutneys and pickles
and in conclusion it stated that there is nothing equal to it
in its greatness and its benefit to the body. When Suri
Nagamma returned to the hall in the afternoon,
Sri Bhagavan inquired if she had read the article and said,
“People say it is very good for health. Really it is so. It cures
rheumatism and gives strength to the body. For children it
acts like amrit (nectar). Garlic is also known as amrit.”
A devotee asked how it got that name. Sri Bhagavan
replied, “There is a curious story about it,” and began telling
the following story.
AS IS WELL known, when gods (devas) and demons (rakshasas)
churned the ocean, amrit came out of it. When the rakshasas
were running away with the vessel containing amrit, the devas
appealed to Vishnu. Vishnu came on to the scene in the shape
of Mohini (enchantress), and offered to resolve their quarrel by
serving amrit to them all. They agreed. While serving it to the
gods first, it appeared that there might not be enough to go
round for the demons. One of the latter got into the line of the
gods, unobserved by Mohini, and was swallowing the amrit,
when the Sun and Moon noticed it and gave her the hint. She
threw the ladle, with which the amrit was being served, at the
demon in such a way as to cut off his head. The ladle became
the Chakra (an invincible lethal weapon of Vishnu) and cut off\n--- 第26页 ---\n18
his head. But as the amrit had already gone down his throat, the
head became a graha (planet) and has since been taking
vengeance on the Sun and Moon at the time of an eclipse. That
is the story. Now, when the head of the demon was severed, the
trunk fell down, and in the process, a few drops of amrit fell on
the ground. It is said that those drops became the garlic plant.
That is why it is said that garlic has some of the properties of
amrit. It is very good for the body. But since it also has the
touch of the demon, it has tamasic qualities too, which when
eaten affect the mind. Hence, it is forbidden for sadhakas.\n--- 第27页 ---\n19
‘‘‘‘‘IIIII’’’’’ YYYYY
AAAAANNNNNDDDDD OOOOOUUUUU
An earnest devotee asked Sri Bhagavan about the
method to realize the Self. As usual, Sri Bhagavan told him
to find out who is the ‘I’ in his question. After a few more
questions in this strain the devotee asked, “Instead of
enquiring ‘Who am I?’, can I put the question to myself
‘Who are you?’ since then, my mind may be fixed on you
whom I consider to be God in the form of Guru.”
Sri Bhagavan replied, “Whatever form your enquiry
may take, you must finally come to the one ‘I’, the Self. All
these distinctions made between ‘I’ and ‘you’, master and
disciple, are merely a sign of one’s ignorance. That ‘I’ Supreme
alone is. To think otherwise is to delude oneself.” Thereupon
Sri Bhagavan told the following story.
A PURANIC STORY of Sage Ribhu and his disciple Nidagha,
is particularly instructive.
Although Ribhu taught his disciple the Supreme Truth of
the One Brahman without a second, Nidagha, in spite of his
erudition and understanding, did not get sufficient conviction
to adopt and follow the path of jnana, but settled down in his
native town to lead a life devoted to the observance of
ceremonial religion.
But the sage loved his disciple as deeply as the latter
venerated his Master. In spite of his age, Ribhu would himself
go to his disciple in the town, just to see how far the latter had
outgrown his ritualism. At times the sage went in disguise, so
that he might observe how Nidagha would act when he did not
know that he was being observed by his master.
On one such occasion Ribhu, who had put on the disguise
of a rustic, found Nidagha intently watching a royal procession.\n--- 第28页 ---\n20
Unrecognised by the town-dweller Nidagha, the village rustic
enquired what the bustle was all about, and was told that the
king was going in procession.
“Oh! It is the king. He goes in procession! But where is
he?” asked the rustic.
“There, on the elephant,” said Nidagha.
“You say the king is on the elephant. Yes, I see the two,”
said the rustic, “But which is the king and which is the elephant?”
“What!” exclaimed Nidagha. “You see the two, but do not
know that the man above is the king and the animal below is
the elephant? What is the use of talking to a man like you?”
“Pray, be not impatient with an ignorant man like me,”
begged the rustic. “But you said ‘above’ and ‘below’ – what do
they mean?”
Nidagha could stand it no more. “You see the king and the
elephant, the one above and the other below. Yet you want to know
what is meant by ‘above’ and ‘below’?” burst out Nidagha. “If things
seen and words spoken can convey so little to you, action alone
can teach you. Bend forward, and you will know it all too well”.
The rustic did as he was told. Nidagha got on his shoulders
and said, “Know it now. I am above as the king, you are below
as the elephant. Is that clear enough?”
“No, not yet,” was the rustic’s quiet reply. “You say you are
above like the king, and I am below like the elephant. The
‘king’, the ‘elephant’, ‘above’ and ‘below’ – so far it is clear. But
pray, tell me what you mean by ‘I’ and ‘you’?”
When Nidagha was thus confronted all of a sudden with
the mighty problem of defining the ‘you’ apart from the ‘I’,
light dawned on his mind. At once he jumped down and fell at
his Master’s feet saying, “Who else but my venerable Master,
Ribhu, could have thus drawn my mind from the superficialities
of physical existence to the true Being of the Self? Oh! Benign
Master, I crave thy blessings.”\n--- 第29页 ---\n21
EEEEE FFFFF
AAAAARRRRRNNNNNEEEEESSSSSTTTTTNNNNNEEEEESSSSSSSSSS OOOOORRRRR AAAAAIIIIITTTTTHHHHH
(((((SSSSS )))))
RRRRRAAAAADDDDDDDDDDHHHHHAAAAA
A devotee obtained a copy of Sri Bhagavan’s work
Ulladu Narpadu (Forty Verses on Reality) and began to
write out the entire work for himself. Seeing him doing this
writing with earnestness, though with a certain amount of
difficulty and strain, since the devotee was not accustomed
to squatting and doing continuous writing work, Bhagavan
told the story of a sannyasi and his disciples to illustrate
what is called sraddha – earnestness of purpose.
THERE WAS ONCE a guru who had eight disciples. One day he
instructed them all to make a copy of his teachings from a note-
book he had kept. One of them, who had lived an easy-going life
before renouncing the world, could not make a copy for himself.
He, therefore paid a couple of rupees to a fellow disciple and
requested him to make a copy for him also. The guru examined
the copy books one day and, noticing two books in the same
handwriting, asked the disciples for an explanation. Both the writer
and the one on whose behalf it was written told the truth about it.
The Master commented that, though speaking the truth was an
essential quality of a spiritual aspirant, it alone would not carry one
to one’s goal, but that sraddha (earnestness of purpose) was also
necessary. Since this had not been exhibited by the disciple who
had entrusted his own labour to another, he was disqualified from
discipleship. Referring to his making payment for the work, the
guru sarcastically remarked that “Salvation” costs more than that
and he was at liberty to purchase it rather than undergo training
under him. So saying he dismissed that disciple.\n--- 第30页 ---\n22
IIIII WWWWW BBBBB NNNNN
NNNNN TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE OOOOORRRRRLLLLLDDDDD UUUUUTTTTT OOOOOTTTTT
WWWWW
OOOOOFFFFF TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE OOOOORRRRRLLLLLDDDDD
KADUVELI SIDDHAR WAS famed as a very austere hermit.
He lived on the dry leaves fallen from trees. The king of the
country heard of him and offered a reward to one who would
prove this man’s worth. A rich dasi agreed to do it. She began to
live near the recluse and pretended to attend on him. She gently
left pieces of pappadam along with the dry leaves picked by
him. When he had eaten them she began to leave other kinds
of tasty food along with the dry leaves. Eventually he took good
tasty dishes supplied by her. They became intimate and a child
was born to them. She reported the matter to the king.
The king wanted to know if she could prove their mutual
relationship to the general public. She agreed and suggested
a plan of action. Accordingly the king announced a public
dancing performance by the dasi and invited the people to
it. The crowd gathered and she also appeared, but not before
she had given a dose of physic to the child and left it in
charge of the saint at home.
As the dance was at its height, the child was crying at home
for its mother. The father took the babe in his arms and went to
the dancing performance. As she was dancing hilariously he
could not approach her with the child. She noticed the man
and the babe, and contrived to kick her legs in the dance, so as
to unloose one of her anklets just as she approached the place
where the saint was. She gently lifted her foot and he tied the
anklet. The public shouted and laughed. But he remained
unaffected. Yet to prove his worth, he sang a Tamil song meaning:\n--- 第31页 ---\n23
“For victory, let go my anger!
I release my mind when it rushes away.
If it is true that I sleep day and
night quite aware of my Self,
may this stone burst into twain
and become the wide expanse!”
Immediately the stone (idol) burst with a loud noise. The
people were astounded.
Thus he proved himself an unswerving jnani. One should
not be deceived by the external appearance of a jnani. Verse
181 of Vedanta Chudamani further explains this. Its meaning is
as follows:
Although a jivanmukta associated with the body may, owing
to his prarabdha, appear to lapse into ignorance or wisdom, yet
he is only pure like the ether (akasa) which is always itself clear,
whether covered by dense clouds or without being covered by
clouds. He always revels in the Self alone, like a loving wife
taking pleasure with her husband alone. Though she attends on
him with things obtained from others (by way of fortune, as
determined by her prarabdha). Though he remains silent like
one devoid of learning, his supineness is due to the implicit
duality of the vaikhari vak (spoken words) of the Vedas; his
silence is the highest expression of the realised non-duality which
is after all the true content of the Vedas. Though he instructs his
disciples, he does not pose as a teacher in the full conviction
that the teacher and disciple are mere conventions born of
illusion (maya), and so he continues to utter words like akasvani.
If, on the other hand, he mutters words incoherently like a
lunatic, it is because his experience is inexpressible. If his words
are many and fluent like those of an orator, they represent the
recollection of his experience, since he is the unmoving non-
dual One without any desire awaiting fulfilment. Although he
may appear grief-stricken like any other man in bereavement,\n--- 第32页 ---\n24
yet he evinces just the right love of and pity for the senses which
he earlier controlled before he realised that they were mere
instruments and manifestations of the Supreme Being. When
he seems keenly interested in the wonders of the world, he is
only ridiculing the ignorance born of superimposition. If he
appears wrathful he means well to the offenders. All his actions
should be taken to be only divine manifestations on the plane
of humanity. There should not arise even the least doubt as to
his being emancipated while yet alive. He lives only for the
good of the world.\n--- 第33页 ---\n25
TTTTT AAAAA
OOOOOTTTTTAAAAALLLLL BBBBBIIIIIDDDDDAAAAANNNNNCCCCCEEEEE
A devotee asked, “How does the repetition of the name
of God help Realisation?” Sri Bhagavan replied, “The
original name is always going on spontaneously without any
effort on the part of the individual. That name is aham –
‘I’. But when it becomes manifest it manifests as ahamkara
– the ego. The oral repetition of the name leads one to mental
repetition which finally resolves itself into the eternal
vibration. The mind or the mouth cannot act without the
Self.” Thereupon Sri Bhagavan told the following story.
TUKARAM, THE GREAT Maharashtra Saint, used to remain
in samadhi in the day and sing and dance at night with large
crowds of people. He always used to utter the name of Sri Rama.
Once he was answering the call of nature and also saying “Ram,
Ram”. An orthodox priest was shocked at the uttering of the
holy name by the saint when his body was not clean. Hence he
reprimanded him and ordered him to be silent. Tukaram said,
“All right!” and remained mute. But at once there arose the
name of Rama from every pore of Tukaram and the priest was
horrified by the din. He then prayed to Tukaram, “Restrictions
are only for the common people and not for saints like you.”\n--- 第34页 ---\n26
QQQQQ PPPPP
UUUUUIIIIIEEEEETTTTT IIIIIEEEEETTTTTYYYYY
THERE WAS A king with a devoted queen. She was a devotee
of Sri Rama and yearned that her husband should similarly be a
devotee. One night she found that the king mumbled something
in his sleep. She kept her ears close to his lips and heard the
word ‘Rama’ repeated continually as in japa. She was delighted
and the next day ordered the minister to hold a feast. The king
having partaken of the feast asked his wife for an explanation.
She related the whole occurrence and said that the feast was in
gratitude to God for the fulfilment of a long cherished wish.
The king was however annoyed that his devotion should have
been found out. Some say that having thus betrayed God he
considered himself unworthy of God and so committed suicide.
It means that one should not openly display one’s piety. We
may take it that the king told the queen not to make a fuss over
his piety and they then lived happily together.\n--- 第35页 ---\n27
UUUUU TTTTT MMMMM
NNNNNKKKKKNNNNNOOOOOWWWWWNNNNN EEEEENNNNNTTTTTHHHHH AAAAANNNNN
D. Not having realised the Truth that the Self alone
exists, should I not adopt bhakti and yoga margas as being
more suitable for purposes of sadhana than vichara marga?
Is not the Realization of one’s Absolute Being that is, Brahma
jnana, something quite unattainable to a layman like me?
M. Brahma jnana is not a knowledge to be acquired,
so that acquiring it one may obtain happiness. It is one’s
ignorant outlook that one should give up. The Self you seek
to know is verily yourself. Your supposed ignorance causes
you needless grief like that of the ten foolish men who grieved
the ‘loss’ of the tenth man who was never lost.
THE TEN FOOLISH men in the parable forded a stream and
on reaching the other shore wanted to make sure that all of
them had in fact safely crossed the stream. One of the ten began
to count, but while counting others left himself out. “I see only
nine; sure enough we have lost one. Who can it be?” he said.
“Did you count correctly?” asked another, and did the counting
himself. But he too counted only nine. One after the other
each of the ten counted only nine, missing himself. “We are
only nine” they all agreed, “but who is the missing one?”, they
asked themselves. Every effort they made to discover the ‘missing’
individual failed. “Whoever he be that is drowned” said the
sentimental of ten fools, “we have lost him”. So saying he burst
into tears, and the rest of the nine followed suit. Seeing them
weeping on the river bank, a sympathetic wayfarer enquired
for the cause. They related what had happened and said that\n--- 第36页 ---\n28
even after counting themselves several times they could find no
more than nine. On hearing the story, but seeing all the ten
before him, the wayfarer guessed what had happened. In order
to make them know for themselves that they were really ten,
that all of them had come safe from the crossing, he told them,
“Let each of you count for himself but one after the other serially,
one, two, three and so on, while I shall give you each a blow so
that all of you may be sure of having been included in the
count, and included only once. The tenth ‘missing’ man will
then be found.” Hearing this they rejoiced at the prospect of
finding their ‘lost’ comrade and accepted the method suggested
by the wayfarer.
While the kind wayfarer gave a blow to each of the ten in
turn, he that got the blow counted himself aloud. “Ten” said
the last man as he got the last blow in his turn. Bewildered they
looked at one another, “We are ten” they said with one voice
and thanked the wayfarer for having removed their grief.
That is the parable. From where was the tenth man
brought in? Was he ever lost? By knowing that he had been
there all the while, did they learn anything new? The cause of
their grief was not the real loss of any one of the ten, it was
their own ignorance, rather their mere supposition that one
of them was lost – though they could not find who he was –
because they counted only nine.\n--- 第37页 ---\n29
GGGGG WWWWW HHHHH
OOOOODDDDD OOOOORRRRRKKKKKSSSSS FFFFFOOOOORRRRR IIIIISSSSS
DDDDD
EEEEEVVVVVOOOOOTTTTTEEEEEEEEEE
ON A PARTICULAR day in the year the God and the Goddess
are taken to an adjoining field and the festival of the gods and
goddess is celebrated. This is in memory of the fact that one day
Sundaramurti Swami entered the temple and found to his dismay
that neither God nor Goddess was there, and that on searching
for them he found them in a field working at transplanting
seedlings for a devotee, a Harijan.
EEEEE RRRRR HHHHH OOOOO
AAAAACCCCCHHHHH EEEEEFFFFFLLLLLEEEEECCCCCTTTTTSSSSS IIIIISSSSS WWWWWNNNNN
NNNNN
AAAAATTTTTUUUUURRRRREEEEE
A NAYANAR WENT to Kalahasti for the darsan of God. He
saw all the people there as Siva, and Sakti, because he Himself
was so. Again Dharmaputra considered that the whole world
was composed of people having some merit or other and that
each of them was even better than he himself for some reason
or other. Whereas Duryodhana could not find even a single
good person in the world. Each reflects his own nature.\n--- 第38页 ---\n30
TTTTT MMMMM ’’’’’ PPPPP
HHHHHEEEEE AAAAASSSSSTTTTTEEEEERRRRR SSSSS AAAAAYYYYYMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
A DISCIPLE SERVED his master for a long time and realised
the Self. He was in Bliss and wanted to express his gratitude to
the Master. He was in tears of joy and his voice choked when he
spoke. He said, “What a wonder that I did not know my very
Self all these years! I suffered long and you so graciously helped
me to realise the Self. How shall I repay your grace? It is not in
my power to do it.” The Master replied, “Well, well. Your
repayment consists in not lapsing into ignorance again but in
continuing in the state of your real Self.”
TTTTT FFFFF LLLLL
HHHHHEEEEE AAAAAUUUUULLLLLTTTTT IIIIIEEEEESSSSS IIIIINNNNN
EEEEE
XXXXXPPPPPOOOOOSSSSSUUUUURRRRREEEEE
EZHUTHACHAN, A GREAT saint and author, had a few
fish concealed on him when he entered the temple. The saint
was searched and taken to the king. The king asked him, “Why
did you take the fish into the temple?” He replied, “It is not my
fault. I had it concealed in my clothes. The others exposed the
fish in the temple. The fault lies in exposure. Excreta within the
body are not considered filthy; but when excreted, they are
considered filthy. So also with this.”\n--- 第39页 ---\n31
BBBBB ’’’’’ TTTTT
RRRRRAAAAAHHHHHMMMMMAAAAACCCCCHHHHHAAAAARRRRRIIIII SSSSS OOOOOUUUUUCCCCCHHHHH
SRI BHAGAVAN WARNED the hearers against the mistake of
disparaging a jnani for his apparent conduct and again cited the
story of Parikshit. He was a still born child. The ladies cried and
appealed to Sri Krishna to save the child. The sages round about
wondered how Krishna was going to save the child from the
effects of the arrows (apandavastra) of Asvattama. Krishna said,
“If the child be touched by one eternally celibate (nityabramachari)
the child would be brought to life.” Even Suka dared not touch
the child. Finding no one among the reputed saints bold enough
to touch the child, Krishna went and touched it, saying, “If I am
eternally celibate (nityabramachari) may the child be brought to
life.” The child began to breathe and later grew up to be Parikshit.
Just consider how Krishna surrounded by 16,000 gopis is
a brahmachari! Such is the mystery of jivanmukti! A jivanmukta
is one who does not see anything separate from the Self.\n--- 第40页 ---\n32
TTTTT KKKKK HHHHH
HHHHHEEEEE IIIIINNNNNGGGGG AAAAANNNNNDDDDD IIIIISSSSS
MMMMM
IIIIINNNNNIIIIISSSSSTTTTTEEEEERRRRRSSSSS
D: What is the difference between a man who makes
no attempt and remains an ajnani, and another who gains
a glimpse and returns to ajnana?
M: In the latter case a stimulus is always present to
goad him on to further efforts until the Realisation is perfect.
D: The Srutis say, ‘this knowledge of Brahman shines
forth once and for ever’.
M: They refer to the permanent Realisation and not to
the glimpse.
D: How is it possible that a man forgets his own
experience and falls back into ignorance?
Sri Bhagavan illustrated this with the following story.
THERE WAS A king who treated his subjects well. One of his
ministers gained his confidence and misused the influence. All
the other ministers and officers were adversely affected and they
hit upon a plan to get rid of him. They instructed the guards
not to let the man enter the palace. The king noted his absence
and enquired after him. He was informed that the man was
taken ill and could not therefore come to the palace. The king
deputed his physician to attend on the minister. False reports
were conveyed to the king that the minister was sometimes
improving and at other times collapsing. The king desired to
see the patient. But the pandits said that such an action was\n--- 第41页 ---\n33
against the dharma. Later the minister was reported to have
died. The king was very sorry when he heard the news.
The arrogant minister was kept informed of all the
happenings by spies of his own. He tried to foil the other
ministers. He waited for the king to come out of the palace so
that he might report himself to the king. On one occasion he
climbed up a tree, hid himself among the branches and awaited
the king. The king came out that night in the palanquin and
the man in hiding jumped down in front of the palanquin and
shouted his identity. The companion of the king was equally
resourceful. He at once took out a handful of sacred ashes
(vibhuti) from his pocket and scattered it in the air so that the
king was obliged to close his eyes. The companion also shouted
victory (jai) to the king and ordered the band to play so that
the other man’s shout was drowned in the noise. He also ordered
the palanquin-bearers to move fast and he himself sang
incantations to keep off evil spirits. The king was thus left under
the impression that the dead man’s ghost was playing pranks
with him.
The disappointed man became desperate and retired into
the forest for tapasya (austerities). After a long time the king
happened to go hunting. He came across the former minister
seated in deep contemplation. But he hastened away from the
spot lest the ghost should molest him.\n--- 第42页 ---\n34
TTTTT GGGGG JJJJJ
HHHHHEEEEE RRRRREEEEEAAAAATTTTTNNNNNEEEEESSSSSSSSSS OOOOOFFFFF AAAAAPPPPPAAAAA
A devotee asked, “Swami, what is the easiest way to
attain moksha?”
Bhagavan said with a smile, “As and when the mind
goes astray, it should be turned inward and made to steady
itself in the thought of the Self. That is the only way.”
Another devotee said, “To do so, the repeating of the
name of Rama is good, is it not?”
“Certainly, it is good,” said Bhagavan. “What could
be better? The greatness of the japa of the name of Rama is
extraordinary. In the story of Namadeva he is reported to
have told one devotee, ‘If you want to know the greatness of
the name of Rama you must first know what your own name
is, what your real nature (swarupa) is, who you are and
how you were born. Unless you know your own origin, you
will not know your name!’ This idea is found in the Abhangas
of Namadeva written in Marathi language and in the
Malayalam Adhyatma Ramayana.” Thereupon Bhagavan
related a story from the latter.
IT IS STATED in that book that when Anjaneya went in
search of Sita, he seated himself opposite to Ravana in the
Darbar Hall on a high pedestal and fearlessly spoke to him
thus: ‘Oh Ravana, I give you a teaching (upadesa) for attaining
liberation (moksha). Please listen to me carefully. It is certain
that the Self (Atma) gets purified by intense devotion to Hari,
who is in the lotus of the Heart at all times. The ego gets
destroyed and then the sin gets destroyed. Afterwards, in its\n--- 第43页 ---\n35
place, the knowledge of the transcendent Self emerges. With
a pure mind and with the Bliss (Ananda) generated by a firm
knowledge of the Self, the two letters ‘Ra’ ‘Ma’ which are like
mantras, will repeat themselves within you automatically. What
more is required for a person who has this knowledge, however
little it might be? Hence worship the lotus feet of Vishnu,
which will remove all worldly fears, which are dear to all
devotees and which shine as brightly as the light of a crore of
Suns. Give up the ignorance of your mind’. This has been
mentioned in two or three slokas in the Sanskrit Adhyatma
Ramayanam but not as elaborately as in the Malayalam text.
Is the greatness of the name of Rama ordinary?\n--- 第44页 ---\n36
SSSSS EEEEE
IIIIILLLLLEEEEENNNNNTTTTT LLLLLOOOOOQQQQQUUUUUEEEEENNNNNCCCCCEEEEE
Lakshman Brahmachari from Sri Ramakrishna
Mission asked, “Enquiry of ‘Who am I?’ or of the ‘I-thought’
being itself a thought, how can it be destroyed in the process?”
Sri Bhagavan replied with a story.
WHEN SITA WAS asked who was her husband among the
rishis (Rama himself being present there as a rishi) in the forest,
by the wives of the rishis, she denied each one as he was pointed
out to her, but simply hung down her head when Rama was
pointed out. Her silence was eloquent.
Similarly, the Vedas also are eloquent in neti-neti (not this,
not this) and then remain silent. Their silence is the Real State.
This is the meaning of exposition by silence. When the source
of the ‘I’-thought is reached it vanishes and what remains is the
Self.\n--- 第45页 ---\n37
HHHHH MMMMM
EEEEEAAAAADDDDDSSSSSHHHHHIIIIIPPPPP OOOOOFFFFF AAAAA UUUUUTTTTTTTTTT
A devotee told Bhagavan about his ill-health,
treatment by doctors and services rendered to him by his
servants. Bhagavan did not immediately reply to him, but
in the evening, when the devotees all gathered, he began
massaging his own legs with oil. Looking at the questioner
with a smile, he said, “We are our own doctors and our own
servants.” The questioner then said, “What are we to do if
we do not have strength like Bhagavan to attend to our own
work?” Bhagavan’s reply was, “If we have strength to eat,
why should we not have strength to do this?” The questioner
could not say anything and so kept silent with his head bent.
Just then the post arrived. After looking through the letters,
Bhagavan narrated the following story.
ONCE A CERTAIN sanyasi was anxious to be the head of a
Mutt. He had to have disciples, you see and he tried his level
best to secure some. Anyone who came, soon found out the
limited knowledge of the person and so went away. No one
stayed on. What could he do?
One day he had to go to a city. There he had to keep up
his position; but he had no disciple. No one must know this.
His bundle of clothes, etc., was on his head. So, he thought he
would place the bundle in some house unobserved and then
pretend to go there afterwards. He wandered throughout the
place. Whenever he tried to step into a house, he found a
number of people in front of it. Poor chap! What could he
do? It was almost evening. He was tired. At last he found a\n--- 第46页 ---\n38
house with no one in front. The door was open. Greatly
relieved, he placed the bundle in one corner of the house and
then sat in the verandah.
After a while the lady of the house came out and enquired
who he was. “Me! I am the head of a Mutt in such and such a
place. I came to this city on some work. I heard that you were
good householders. I therefore sent my belongings through my
disciple to put them in your house thinking that we could put up
with you for the night and go away next morning. Has he done
so?” “No one has come sir”, she said. “No, please. I asked him to
put the bundle here, go to the bazaar and get some things. Kindly
see if he has put it in any corner”, he said. When the lady searched
this side and that, she saw the bundle in one corner. Thereupon
she and her husband welcomed him and gave him food, etc.
Rather late in the night, they asked, “How is it, sir your
disciple has not come yet?” He said, “Perhaps that useless fellow
has eaten something in the bazaar and is wandering about. You
please go to bed. If he comes, I will open the door for him.”
That couple had by then understood the sanyasi’s true
position. They thought they would see further fun and so went
into the house to lie down. Then the person started his acting.
He opened the door and closed it, making a loud noise so as to
be heard by the members of the household. He then said loudly,
“Why! What have you been doing so long? Take care – if you
do it again, I shall beat you black and blue. Be careful
henceforth.” Changing his tone thereafter, he said in a plaintive
voice, “Swami, Swami, please excuse me. I shall not do it again.”
Assuming the original tone, he said, “All right. Come here,
massage my legs here. No, there. Please hit lightly with your
fists. Yes a little more.” So saying, he massaged his own legs and
then said, “Enough. It is rather late. Go to bed.” So saying he
went to sleep. There was a hole in the wall of the room where\n--- 第47页 ---\n39
the couple were staying and through it they saw the whole farce.
In the early morning the sanyasi again began repeating
the evening’s performance, saying, “You lazy fellow! The cocks
have begun to crow. Go to so and so’s house and come back
after doing such and such work.” So saying, he opened the
door, pretended to send him away and went back to bed. The
couple saw this also.
In the morning he bundled up his belongings, put the
bundle in a corner, and went to a tank nearby for bathing,
etc. The couple took the bundle and hid it somewhere. The
sannyasi returned and searched the whole room but the bundle
was not found anywhere. So he asked the lady of the house,
“Where is my bundle?” The couple then replied, “Sir, your
disciple came here and took away the bundle saying you wanted
him to bring it to you. It is the same person who massaged
your legs last night. He must be round the corner. Please see,
Swami.” What could he do then? He kept his mouth shut and
started going home.
This is what happens if a disciple serves you. Just like me,
we are our own servants.
So saying, Bhagavan pretended to massage his legs with
his hands and his fists.\n--- 第48页 ---\n40
BBBBB EEEEE
HHHHHAAAAAKKKKKTTTTTAAAAA KKKKKAAAAANNNNNAAAAATTTTTHHHHH
A discussion in the hall centred on the story of
Kulasekhara Alwar, which had appeared in the Vision
magazine. During a Harikatha, Kulasekhara identifying
himself so completely with the situation of the story, felt it
his duty as a worshipper of Rama to at once hasten to Lanka
and release Sita. He ran to the sea and entered it to cross
over to Lanka, when Rama appeared with Sita and
Lakshmana and showered His grace on him. This led others
in the hall to remark, “Some Maratha saint also did a similar
thing. He leaped up to the roof, I think.” Thereupon Sri
Bhagavan related the story.
EKANATH WAS WRITING the Ramayana, and when he
came to the portion in which he was graphically describing that
Hanuman jumped across the ocean to Lanka, he so identified
himself with his hero Hanuman that unconsciously he leaped
into the air and landed on the roof of his neighbour’s house.
This neighbour had always had a poor opinion of Ekanath,
taking him for a humbug and religious hypocrite. He heard a
thud on his roof, and coming out to see what it was, discovered
Ekanath lying down on the roof with a cadjan leaf in one hand
and his iron stile in the other. The cadjan leaf had verses
describing how Hanuman leapt across the sea. This incident
proved to the neighbour what a genuine bhakta Ekanath was
and he became his disciple.
After a pause Bhagavan also related: “God appeared in a
dream to Ekanath and asked him to go and repair the tomb\n--- 第49页 ---\n41
of Jnaneswar. When Ekanath went there accordingly, he found
a contractor ready to do all the work and take payment at the
end. The contractor opened a big account in which all expenses
were entered, with the names of all the workmen and wages
paid. Everything went on systematically. When the work of
repairs was completed, the accounts were looked into and the
contractor paid his dues. Then the contractor and his big
account book totally disappeared. Then alone Ekanath came
to know that God was his contractor and did the work. Such
things have happened.”\n--- 第50页 ---\n42
TTTTT IIIII PPPPP
HHHHHEEEEE MMMMMMMMMMAAAAATTTTTUUUUURRRRREEEEE OOOOOTTTTT
D: Is it possible to speak to Iswara as Sri Ramakrishna
did?
M: When we can speak to each other why should we
not speak to Iswara in the same way?
D: Then why does it not happen with us?
M: It requires purity and strength of mind and practice
in meditation.
D: Does God become evident if the above conditions
exist?
M: Such manifestation is as real as your own reality.
In other words, when you identify yourself with the body as
in jagrat you see gross objects; when in subtle body or in
mental plane as in swapna, you see objects equally subtle; in
the absence of identification as in sushupti you see nothing.
The objects seen bear a relation to the state of the seer. The
same applies to visions of God.
By long practice the figure of God, as meditated upon,
appears in dream and may later appear in jagrat also.
D: Is that the state of God-realisation?
M: Listen to what happened once years ago.
Vithoba found Namdev had not yet realised the Supreme
Truth and wanted to teach him. When Jnaneswar and Namdev
returned from their pilgrimage, Gora Kumbhar gave a feast to
all the saints in his place and among them were Jnaneswar and
Namdev. At the feast Jnaneswar, in collusion with Gora, told
Gora publicly, “You are a potter, daily engaged in making pots\n--- 第51页 ---\n43
and testing them to see which are properly baked and which are
not. These pots before you (i.e., the saints) are the pots of
Brahma. See which of these are sound and which not.”
Thereupon Gora said, “Yes, Swami, I shall do so,” and took up
the stick with which he used to tap his pots to test their soundness.
Holding it aloft in his hand he went to each of his guests and
tapped each on the head as he usually did to his pots. Each guest
humbly submitted to such tapping. But when Gora approached
Namdev, the latter indignantly called out, “You potter, what do
you mean by coming to tap me with that stick?” Gora thereupon
told Jnaneswar, “Swami, all the other pots have been properly
baked. This one (i.e. Namdev) alone is not yet properly baked.”
All the assembled guests burst into laughter.
Namdev felt greatly humiliated and ran up to Vitthala
(the deity he worshipped) with whom he was on the most
intimate terms, playing with him, eating with him, sleeping
with him and so on. Namdev complained of this humiliation
which had happened to him, the closest friend and companion
of Vitthala. Vitthala (who of course knew all this) pretended
to sympathise with him, asked for all the details of the
happenings at Gora’s house and after hearing everything said,
“Why should you not have kept quiet and submitted to the
tapping, as all the others did? That is why all this trouble has
come.” Thereupon Namdev cried all the more and said, “You
also want to join the others and humiliate me. Why should I
have submitted like the others? Am I not your closest friend,
your child?” Vitthala said, “You have not yet properly
understood the truth, and you won’t understand if I tell you.
But go to the saint who is in a ruined temple in such and such
a forest. He will be able to give you enlightenment.”
Namdev accordingly went there and found an old,
unassuming man sleeping in a corner of the temple with his
feet on a Sivalingam. Namdev could hardly believe this was\n--- 第52页 ---\n44
the man from whom he – the companion of Vitthala – was to
gain enlightenment. However, as there was none else there,
Namdev went near the man and clapped his hands. The old
man woke up with a start and seeing Namdev, said, “Oh –
you are Namdev whom Vitthala has sent here. Come!” Namdev
was dumbfounded and began to think, “This must be a great
man.” Still he thought it was revolting that any man however
great, should be resting his feet on a lingam. He asked the old
man, “You seem to be a great personage. But is it proper for
you to have your feet on a lingam?” The old man replied,
“Oh, are my feet on a lingam? Where is it? Please remove my
feet elsewhere.” Namdev removed the feet and put them in
various places. Wherever they were put, there was a Sivalingam.
Finally, he took them on his lap and he himself became a
Sivalingam! Then he realised the truth and the old gentleman
said, “Now you can go back.”
Bhagavan added, “It is to be noted that only when he
surrendered himself, and touched the feet of his guru,
enlightenment came. After this final enlightenment Namdev
returned to his house and for some days did not go to Vitthala
at the temple, though it had been his habit not only to visit
Vitthala every day, but to spend most of his time with Vitthala
at the temple. So, after a few days, Vitthala went to Namdev’s
house and like a guileless soul, enquired how it was that Namdev
had forgotten him and never visited him. Namdev replied, ‘No
more of your fooling me. I know now. Where is the place where
you are not! To be with you, should I go to the temple? Do I
exist apart from you?’ Then Vitthala said, ‘So you now
understand the truth. That is why you had to be sent for this
final lesson’.”\n--- 第53页 ---\n45
TTTTT BBBBB
AAAAAPPPPPOOOOO HHHHHRRRRRAAAAASSSSSHHHHHTTTTTAAAAA
(Fallen from the state of tapas)
NAKKIRAR WAS DOING tapas on the bank of a tirtha. A
leaf fell down from the tree; half the leaf touched the water
and the other half touched the ground. Suddenly the water-
half became a fish and the land-half became a bird. Each of
them was united to the other by the leaf and struggled to go
into its own element. Nakkirar was watching it in wonder
and suddenly a spirit came down from above and carried him
away to a cave where there were already 999 captives, all of
whom were tapo bhrashtas.
Devotee: “Was Nakkirar a tapo bhrashta?”
Bhagavan: “Yes. While engaged in contemplation, why
did he fall from contemplation and take to watching the
mysterious happening in front of him? Nakkirar composed
Tirumurukatruppadai and obtained the release of all the
thousand prisoners.”\n--- 第54页 ---\n46
YYYYY ’’’’’ PPPPP
OOOOOGGGGGIIIII SSSSS EEEEENNNNNAAAAANNNNNCCCCCEEEEE
Bhagavan narrated the following story to illustrate the
distinction between manolaya (stillness of mind) and
manonasa (destruction of mind).
A YOGI WAS doing penance (tapas) for a number of years on
the banks of the Ganges. When he had attained a high degree of
concentration, he believed that to remain in that state for
prolonged periods constituted salvation and therefore continued
practising it. One day, before going into samadhi (a state of deep
concentration), he felt thirsty and asked his disciple to bring some
water for drinking from the Ganges; but before the disciple could
return with the water, he had gone into samadhi, and he remained
in that state for countless years. When he woke up from this
experience, the first thing he did was to say, “water! water!”; but
there was neither his disciple nor the Ganges in sight.
The first thing which he asked for was water because, before
going into deep concentration, the topmost thought in his mind
was about water; by concentration, however deep and prolonged
it might have been, he had only been able to lull his thoughts
temporarily; therefore when he revived consciousness this topmost
thought flew up with all the speed and force of a flood breaking
through the dykes. If this was the case with regard to a thought
which took shape immediately before he sat for meditation, there
is no doubt that other thoughts which had taken deeper root
earlier would still remain unannihilated. If annihilation of
thoughts is salvation, can he be said to have attained salvation?
The moral is that one should not be taken away by the
spell of temporary stillness but pursue the enquiry till the last
vasana is eradicated.\n--- 第55页 ---\n47
BBBBB ’’’’’ CCCCC
RRRRRAAAAAHHHHHMMMMMIIIIINNNNN SSSSS UUUUURRRRRSSSSSEEEEE
ONE DAY A sage called Pakanar was weaving a basket in front
of his house. Hearing a loud voice chanting, “Hare Ram”, he
asked his sister who it was that was chanting. His sister replied
that it was a brahmin who is keeping his own daughter. Pakanar
replied, “You are the hundredth person to repeat the scandal”.
Meanwhile, the brahmin having come to that place, the sage
told the brahmin that his curse was lifted and that he could
return home. Later, he explained to his sister thus: “This brahmin
was living with his widowed daughter. They were generous and
kind-hearted. They would invite sadhus and feed them with
love. On hearing of their generosity a sadhu came to visit them.
He was well received and fed. The sadhu was immensely pleased
with their devotion and decided to bless them.
He just glanced once and knew what was in store for them
when they die. He called the brahmin and told him that after
his death he would be tortured by a mountain of leeches in hell.
On hearing this, the brahmin fell at his feet in terror and
implored him for some means of escape. The sadhu told him,
‘Once while you were cooking food a leech fell from the roof
into the cooking pot and died unobserved. You offered that
food to a realised sage. Since whatever is given to a sage will be
received back a thousand-fold a mountain of leeches are in store
for you’. The sadhu then advised the brahmin that in order to
escape this fate he should conduct himself towards his grown-
up widowed daughter in such a way, as to provoke a scandal
that he was having illicit intimacy with her. He assured him that
when a hundred persons had uttered the scandal the sin would
leave him completely, having been distributed among the
scandal-mongers. The brahmin did accordingly and you are the\n--- 第56页 ---\n48
hundredth person to tell the scandal. So I say that the brahmin’s
curse is now removed.”
Sri Bhagavan drew from the story the following moral:
“Have the best intention, but act in such a way not to win
praise, but to incur blame. Resist the temptation to justify
yourself even when you are just.”\n--- 第57页 ---\n49
KKKKK
AAAAABBBBBIIIIIRRRRR
KABIR WAS A great bhakta (devotee) who lived in or near
Benares some centuries ago. Although he had siddhis (psychic
powers), he earned his livelihood by weaving. One day, when
he was working on his loom, a disciple entered in great
excitement and said, “Sir, there is a juggler outside here who
is attracting large crowds by making his stick stand in the
air”. Thereupon Kabir, who like all true saints, discouraged
the display of jugglery, wanted to shame the man, and so
rushed out with a big ball of thread in his hand. Seeing the
long bamboo standing in the air, he threw his ball of thread
up in the air. As the ball went up it unwound itself till the
whole length of thread stood stiff in mid-air, and to a far
greater height than the juggler’s stick, without any support
whatever. The people, including the juggler himself, were
stunned with amazement, and Sri Bhagavan’s eyes acted the
amazement, while his hand stood high above his head in the
position of Kabir when he threw up the ball.\n--- 第58页 ---\n50
KKKKK ,,,,, SSSSS
AAAAAMMMMMAAAAALLLLL OOOOONNNNN OOOOOFFFFF
SSSSS KKKKK
AAAAAIIIIINNNNNTTTTT AAAAABBBBBIIIIIRRRRR
A devotee asked, “Can the place between the eyebrows
be said to be the seat of the Self?” Bhagavan replied, “The
fact is that a sadhaka may have his experience at any centre
or chakra on which he concentrates his mind. But, that
particular place of his experience does not for that reason
become ipso facto, the seat of the Self. There is an interesting
story about Kamal, the son of Saint Kabir, which serves as
an illustration to show that the head (and a part of the
space between the eyebrows) cannot be considered the seat of
the Self.”
KABIR WAS INTENSELY devoted to Sri Rama, and he never
failed to feed those who sang the praise of the Lord with
devotion. On one occasion, however, it so happened that he
had not the wherewithal to provide food for a large gathering
of devotees. For him, however, there could be no alternative
except that he must somehow make every necessary arrangement
before the next morning. So he and his son set out at night to
secure the required provisions.
The story goes that after the father and son had removed
the provisions from a merchant’s house through a hole they made
in the wall, the son went in again just to wake up the household
and tell them, as a matter of principle, that their house had been
burgled. When, having roused the household, the boy tried to
make good his escape through the hole and join his father on the
other side, his body got stuck in the aperture. To avoid being
identified by the pursuing household (because, if detected, there\n--- 第59页 ---\n51
would be no feeding at all of the devotees the next day), he called
out to his father and told him to sever his head and take it away
with him. That done, Kabir made good his escape with the stolen
provisions and his son’s head, which on reaching home was hidden
away from possible detection.
The next day Kabir gave a feast to the bhaktas, quite
unmindful of what had happened the previous night. “If it is
Rama’s Will,” said Kabir to himself, “that my son should die,
may it prevail!” In the evening after the feast, Kabir set out with
his party as usual in procession into the town with bhajana, etc.
Meanwhile, the burgled householder reported to the king,
producing the truncated body of Kamal, which gave them no
clue. In order to secure its identification, the king had the body
tied up prominently on the highway so that whoever claimed it
or took it away (for no dead body is forsaken without the last
rites being given to it by the kith and kin) might be interrogated
or arrested by the police, who were posted secretly for the purpose.
Kabir and his party came along the highway with the bhajana
in full swing when, to the astonishment of all, Kamal’s truncated
body (which was considered dead as a door-nail) began to clap its
hands, marking time to the tune sung by the bhajana party.
This story disproves the suggestion that the head or the
place between the eyebrows is the seat of the Self. It may also be
noted that when in the battlefield the head of a soldier in action
is severed from the body by a sudden and powerful stroke of
the sword, the body continues to run or move its limbs as in a
mock fight, just for a while, before it finally falls down dead.
A devotee protested: “But Kamal’s body was dead hours before.”
Bhagavan replied: “What you call death is really no
extraordinary experience for Kamal. Here is the story of what
happened when he was younger still.”
As a boy Kamal had a friend of equal age with whom he
used to play games of marbles etc. A general rule they observed\n--- 第60页 ---\n52
between themselves was that if one of them owed the other a
game or two, the same should be redeemed the next day. One
evening they parted with a game to the credit of Kamal. Next
day, in order to claim “the return of the game”, Kamal went to
the boy’s house, where he saw the boy laid on the verandah,
while his relatives were weeping beside him. “What is the
matter?” Kamal asked them. “He played with me last evening
and also owes me a game.” The relatives wept all the more saying
that the boy was dead. “No,” said Kamal, “he is not dead but
merely pretends to be so, just to evade redeeming the game he
owes me.” The relatives protested, asking Kamal to see for himself
that the boy was really dead, that the body was cold and stiff.
“But all this is a mere pretension of the boy, I know. What if
the body be stiff and cold? I too can become like that.” So
saying Kamal laid himself down and in the twinkling of an eye
was dead.
The poor relatives who were weeping till then for the death
of their own boy, were distressed and dismayed, and now began
to weep for Kamal’s death also. But up rose Kamal on his back,
declaring, “Do you see it now? I was as you would say dead, but I
am up again, alive and kicking. This is how he wants to deceive
me, but he cannot elude me like this with his pretensions.”
In the end, the story goes, Kamal’s inherent saintliness
gave life to the dead boy, and Kamal got back that was due to
him. The moral is that the death of the body is not the extinction
of the Self. The Self is not limited by birth and death, and its
place in the physical body is not circumscribed by one’s
experience felt at a particular place, as for instance between the
eyebrows, due to practice of dhyana made on that centre. The
supreme State of Self-awareness is never absent; it transcends
the three states of the mind as well as life and death.\n--- 第61页 ---\n53
MMMMM CCCCC
UUUUUTTTTTUUUUUAAAAALLLLL UUUUURRRRRSSSSSEEEEE
INDRA APPROACHED AHALYA (wife of Gautama) taking
the form of Gautama and she yielded without knowing that he
was not her husband. Without ascertaining the truth, Gautama
cursed her to become a stone. Angered thereby Ahalya said, “Oh,
you fool of a Muni! Without enquiring into the truth, you have
cursed me and have not even stated when I shall be free from the
curse. Tell me, when will the curse end and how? Why not have
some consideration for me and tell me at least that?” Gautama
thereupon told her that she would be released from the curse at
the time of Rama avatar when the dust from Rama’s feet fell on
her. Immediately thereafter she became a stone.
Gautama left that place and tried to get into his daily rituals
but he could not, for he had no peace of mind. He tried his
level best but could not control his mind and became more
and more troubled. On thinking deeply over the matter, he
realised that he had cursed his wife Ahalya without proper
enquiry and also recollected that she had in turn cursed him by
saying, “You fool of a Muni!” After all, she was also a great
tapasvini (a female ascetic). Hence those words which were
unusual must have resulted in an irrevocable curse on himself.
He therefore decided to seek the help of Iswara, by seeing his
“Nataraja Dance”, in order to get relieved of the curse.
He therefore went to Chidambaram. At that place he heard
an ethereal voice saying, “I shall be pleased to give you darsan
of my Thandava dance in Trisulapura.” Gautama immediately
left that place and went on foot towards Trisulapura. On nearing
the place, and at the mere sight of it, even from a distance, his
mind began to get clear. He stayed there for a very long time\n--- 第62页 ---\n54
doing tapas. At last Iswara was pleased and gave him darsan of
his “Nataraja Dance” in the month of Dhanus when the Ardra
star was predominant. It was at that time Gautama is reported
to have lived under the tree and performed tapas. After seeing
the dance of Iswara, Gautama worshipped Iswara, went to his
original place and began to perform his rituals as usual.
Later on Ahalya became purified by the dust of the feet of
Sri Rama and regained her normal form.
Devotee: “The statement that Ahalya turned into a stone
applies only to her mind and not to her body. Is that not so?”
Bhagavan: “That is so. If it is not for the mind, could it
be for the body? It is only ordinary people that say her body
turned into a stone and that Rama restored her to her original
form by putting his foot on the stone. How is that possible? It
only means that the mind lost its awareness of the Self, and
unable to think of anything else, she became dull like a stone.
That dullness got relieved by the darsan of a great personage.
As she herself was a great tapasvini she could immediately
become aware of the Self. She worshipped Sri Rama as the
embodiment of the Self. This inner meaning could be found
in the Ramayana. The moment Rama set his foot in
Gautamasrama, the mind of Ahalya was restored to its original
state, like the blossoming of a flower.”\n--- 第63页 ---\n55
TTTTT LLLLL HHHHH CCCCC
HHHHHEEEEE OOOOORRRRRDDDDD IIIIIMMMMMSSSSSEEEEELLLLLFFFFF OOOOOMMMMMEEEEESSSSS
A new Tamil translation of Sankara’s Atmabodha with
a commentary was sent to the Ashram. After glancing
through it, Bhagavan sent it to the library. It was noticed
that Bhagavan did not seem pleased with the translation.
Sending for a copy of Sankara’s Atmabodha from the library,
Bhagavan began looking intently into it and after two days
rendered two slokas into Tamil verse and showed them to
the devotees. Overjoyed at seeing Bhagavan’s translation they
asked him to finish the whole work. Although Bhagavan
said, “Why, why?” he wrote some more saying, “though I
feel disinclined to compose more verses, one after another
comes and stands in front of me. What am I to do?”
Little by little the verses continued till all of them were
translated. Addressing Sri Muruganar, Bhagavan with a
smile said, “How is it I feel I have read this before? Is it
possible that someone has already written this?” Muruganar
answered, “No one has written it in venba metre. What
surprise is there, if one verse after another occurs to
Bhagavan. It is said that in every kalpa the Vedas appeared
as though they were standing before Brahma. This also is
like that.”
JAYADEVA’S STORY IS found in Panduranga Bhakta Vijayam.
After writing the Gita Govindam, Jayadeva wrote Bhagavatam
also in Sanskrit. On hearing about that, Krauncha Raja appealed
to Jayadeva to read the Gita Govindam in the durbar hall and so
he began reading it. People who heard him were so impressed\n--- 第64页 ---\n56
with the writing and with his discourses that his fame spread in all
directions and people came in large numbers to hear him. His
fame spread so far that Jagannatha Swami, the presiding deity of
Puri, was eager to listen to him. So he started in the guise of a
brahmin one day while the discourse was going on and entered
the durbar hall of the king. After blessing the king, he said, “Sir, I
am a resident of Gokula Brindavan. I am a pandit well versed in
all sastras. I have been searching all the world over for someone
who could discuss the sastras with me on equal terms but so far I
have not found any one. I am therefore itching for a discussion. I
learned that Jayadeva was with you and so I came here. Where is
he?” and when the people pointed out Jayadeva to him, he said,
disdainfully, “Oh! You are Jayadeva. Let me see. Let us discuss any
one of the sastras you have studied,” and looking at him steadily,
said, “What is that in your hands?” Without waiting for a reply,
he snatched the book from his hands and said, “Oho! This is
Bhagavatam. So you are a Pauranika? (one who gives discourses
on the epics). Who wrote this?” With fear and devotion Jayadeva
said, “Sir, I am not a pandit to hold discussions with you. I humbly
seek the blessings of elders like you. Though I do not have the
courage to say before you that, I wrote this book, still as it will be
a fault not to tell you the truth, I admit that I am its author.”
That brahmin pretended surprise and said, “What! If it is you
who wrote it, tell me, how could I have learnt all its contents by
heart?” So saying and without opening the book he began
repeating the contents quickly, chapter by chapter. The king and
the audience were amazed. Realising that Lord Jagannatha
Himself had come in that form to shower his grace on him,
Jayadeva prayed to him to reveal his real form (of Vishnu) with
the conch, mace, chakra (discus) etc. Pleased with the stotras
(prayers), Lord Jagannatha revealed Himself in the various forms
in which Jayadeva had invoked Him in his stotras, blessed him
and disappeared.\n--- 第65页 ---\n57
DDDDD
EEEEELLLLLIIIIIVVVVVEEEEERRRRRAAAAANNNNNCCCCCEEEEE OOOOOFFFFF AAAAA
TTTTT BBBBB
HHHHHOOOOORRRRRNNNNN UUUUUSSSSSHHHHH
One of the devotees who had heard of the verses written
by Bhagavan about the deliverance of Lakshmi, the cow,
approached Him and said, “Swami, we ourselves see that
animals and birds are getting deliverance in your presence;
but is it not true that only human beings can get moksha?”
“Why? It is stated that a great saint gave moksha to a
thorn bush,” said Bhagavan with a smile. The devotee
eagerly asked who that great saint was and what was the
story about the thorn bush.
IN CHIDAMBARAM, THERE was a jnani by the name of
Umapathi Sivacharya. He was a poet and also a pandit. As he was
in a transcendental state of spirituality (athita sthithi), he did not
pay much attention to the usual brahminical practices. Hence,
the dikshitars of the place became angry with him, especially since
he was a learned man and knew all the precepts of the Hindu
religion. They forbade him from living in the village or even
visiting the temple. He therefore lived in a small hut built on a
raised ground outside the village. A low caste man called Pethan
Samban used to supply him with all that he required and also
helped him in a general way. As things went on like this, one day,
when Pethan was carrying on his head a bundle of firewood to
the hut, Iswara Himself met him on the way in the guise of the
dikshitar in charge of the temple. He wrote a verse on a palmyra
leaf and gave it to him, telling him that it was to be handed over
to Umapathi Sivacharya, and then disappeared.\n--- 第66页 ---\n58
Pethan gave that verse to Sivacharya, who, on opening it,
found in the first line itself the words, “Adiyarkkadiyen
Chitrambalavanan” (the servant of the devotees, the Lord of
Chidambaram). Immediately, he was overwhelmed with
devotion and a thrill passed through his body as he read the
letter. The gist of the verse was, “A note from Chidambaranathan,
the servant of the devotees, to the person who has set up a new
establishment, namely Sivacharya. It is your duty to give
initiation to this Pethan Samban regardless of caste and to the
surprise of all people.”
He read the letter and was overwhelmed with joy. In
obedience to the orders of the Lord, he initiated Pethan into
the order of sannyasa, though he belonged to the lowest caste.
In due course he gave nayana diksha (transmission of Power
through the eyes) to Pethan, immediately after which Pethan
merged into holy light. Sivacharya himself was immensely
surprised at this occurrence and only then understood the
wisdom of Pethan.
Enemies of Sivacharya noticed the sacrificial offerings and
other things he had for this initiation. They complained to the
king that Sivacharya had burnt Pethan to death for some mistake,
he might have committed. When the king came there with his
retinue to enquire into the complaint, Sivacharya showed the
verse of Lord Nataraja and said that he gave initiation to Pethan
and that Pethan vanished thereafter in the form of a divine
light (jyoti). The king was surprised and asked Sivacharya if he
could likewise give initiation and moksha to the thorn bush
nearby. “Yes. What doubt, is there?” said Sivacharya. Accordingly
he gave nayana diksha to that thorn bush and that too
immediately disappeared in pure light (jyoti).
The king was still more astonished at that and said, “This
looks like some black magic. You said this note had been
written by Lord Nataraja. Let us go and ask Him.” Sivacharya\n--- 第67页 ---\n59
pointed out that there was a ban on his entering the temple.
The king said that would not matter as he himself was
accompanying Sivacharya. Accordingly they started for the
temple together. Hearing all this, all the people – the pundits,
the common people curious about the whole thing and
enemies of Sivacharya who were sure he would be duly
punished – flocked to the temple to see the strange sight. The
two entered the temple. Out of regard for the king, when
Arathi (waving of lights) was offered to Lord Nataraja, it was
found that on either side of the Lord there stood Pethan and
the thorn bush. The pundits were surprised and out of fear
and remorse, fell at the feet of Sivacharya requesting him to
pardon them for all their faults. They subsequently brought
him back into the village with due honours.\n--- 第69页 ---\n61
Brahma,
Vishnu, Siva
Stories of the Hindu trinity Brahma Vishnu and Siva abound
throughout the scriptural literature of India. Although these stories
are both entertaining and enlightening Sri Bhagavan also gives a
deeper meaning to them, he says, “Siva is the Being assuming
all forms and the Consciousness seeing them. That is to say,
Siva is the background underlying both the subject and the
object. Everything has its being in Siva and because of Siva.”\n--- 第71页 ---\n63
SSSSS TTTTT
IIIIILLLLLEEEEENNNNNCCCCCEEEEE IIIIISSSSS TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE RRRRRUUUUUEEEEE
UUUUU
PPPPPAAAAADDDDDEEEEESSSSSAAAAA
Once a devotee came and said that the great sages of
the past had travelled extensively preaching the Truth and
thus had served the world at large. Similarly, if Bhagavan
were to travel thus it would be beneficial to many. Smilingly
Bhagavan replied that his being settled in one place was
also beneficial and narrated the following story.
BRAHMA, THE LORD of Creation, once lost interest in the
work of creation and thought of taking to a life of tapas. So, out
of his mind he created Sanaka, Sanatkumara, Sanandana and
Sanatsujata, with the intention to hand over to them his job in
the course of time. They grew up and mastered all the branches
of study. Brahma then decided to hand over to them his job and
to retire. Sage Narada came to know of his father’s intention.
Since Narada knew that his brothers were full of dispassion and
fit to be initiated into the path of Self-knowledge, he decided to
warn them beforehand of Brahma’s intention. On hearing this
the four brothers, who had no intention to follow the path of
action, left home in search of a guru without informing their
father. They all proceeded to Vaikunta, the abode of Vishnu.
There they saw Lakshmi sitting on Vishnu’s couch massaging His
Feet. On seeing this they thought, “How can this family man
bound by the intimate glance of his consort render us any help
in learning adhyatma vidya. Look at the splendour of this palace
and this city! This is enough. Let us seek the help of Lord Siva.”\n--- 第72页 ---\n64
Lord Siva, who was in Kailas with His family, knew
beforehand about their coming and understood their plight.
He was sure that they would be disappointed on seeing Him
with a family, so taking pity on them He decided to impart
spiritual knowledge to them. The kind-hearted Lord left
Mount Kailas and taking the youthful form of Dakshinamurti
seated Himself with Chinmudra under a banyan tree on the
Northern side of Lake Manasarovar, on the way by which
these disappointed devotees were returning to their homes.
When they came and sat before Him, He went into samadhi.
He was in Perfect Repose. Silence prevailed. They saw Him.
The effect was immediate. They fell into samadhi and their
doubts were cleared.
Silence is the true upadesa. It is the perfect upadesa. It is
suited only for the most advanced. Others are unable to draw
full inspiration from it. Therefore they require words to explain
the Truth. But Truth is beyond words. It does not admit of
explanation. All that is possible to do is only to indicate it.\n--- 第73页 ---\n65
DDDDD
AAAAAKKKKKSSSSSHHHHHIIIIINNNNNAAAAAMMMMMUUUUURRRRRTTTTTIIIII
The Self alone, the Sole Reality,
Exists for ever.
If of yore the First of Teachers
Revealed it through unbroken silence
Say, who can reveal it in spoken words?
– Ekatma Panchakam, Sri Bhagavan.
Sri Bhagavan once told the story that follows to
Sri Muruganar. This brings out the profound significance of
the Supreme Silence in which the First Master,
Sri Dakshinamurti is established.
Sri Bhagavan said,
“When the four elderly Sanakadi rishis first beheld the
sixteen-year-old Sri Dakshinamurti sitting under the banyan
tree, they were at once attracted by Him, and understood that
He was the real Sadguru. They approached Him, did three
pradakshinas around Him, prostrated before Him, sat at His
Feet and began to ask shrewd and pertinent questions about
the nature of reality and the means of attaining it. Because of
the great compassion and fatherly love (vatsalya) which He felt
for His aged disciples, the young Sri Dakshinamurti was
overjoyed to see their earnestness, wisdom and maturity, and
gave apt replies to each of their questions. But as He answered
each consecutive question, further doubts arose in their minds
and they asked further questions. Thus they continued to
question Sri Dakshinamurti for a whole year, and He continued\n--- 第74页 ---\n66
to clear their doubts through His compassionate answers. Finally,
however, Sri Dakshinamurti understood that if He continued
answering their questions, more doubts would arise in their
minds and their ignorance (ajnana) would never end. Therefore,
suppressing even the feeling of compassion and fatherly love
which was welling up within Him, He merged Himself into the
Supreme Silence. Because of their great maturity (which had
ripened to perfection through their year-long association with
the Sadguru), as soon as Sri Dakshinamurti assumed Silence,
they too automatically merged into Supreme Silence, the true
state of the Self.”
Wonderstruck on hearing Sri Bhagavan narrating the story
in this manner, Sri Muruganar remarked that in no book was it
mentioned that Sri Dakshinamurti ever spoke anything. “But
this is what actually happened”, replied Sri Bhagavan curtly.
From the authoritative way in which Sri Bhagavan replied and
from the clear and descriptive way in which He told the story,
Sri Muruganar understood that Sri Bhagavan was none other
than Sri Dakshinamurti Himself!\n--- 第75页 ---\n67
BBBBB ’’’’’ PPPPP
RRRRRAAAAAHHHHHMMMMMAAAAA SSSSS RRRRRIIIIIDDDDDEEEEE
A family came from a distant place to seek solace from
the grief of losing six sons; the last child had recently died. As
though Bhagavan had inspired the question, a devotee asked
about using pranayama and other practices to prolong life
to enable them to become realised souls, jnanis.
Bhagavan gently replied, “Yes, people do live long if
they do these practices, but does a person become a jnani, a
realised soul, by living long? A realised soul has really no
love for his body. For one who is the embodiment of bliss, the
body itself is a disease. He will await the time to be rid of
the body.”
A devotee said, “Some people say we have lived for fifty
years, what more is needed? As though living so long were a
great thing!”
“Yes,” said Bhagavan with a laugh, “that is so. It is a
sort of pride and there is a story about it.”
IT SEEMS THAT in the olden days, Brahma once felt proud
of the fact that he was long-lived. He went to Vishnu and said,
“Do you not see how great a person I am! I am the oldest living
person (chiranjeevi).” Vishnu told him that was not so and that
there were people who had lived much longer than he. When
Brahma said that could not be, since he was the creator of all
living beings, Vishnu took him with him to show him people
older than him.
They went along until, at a certain place, they found
Romasa Mahamuni. Vishnu asked him his age and how long\n--- 第76页 ---\n68
he expected to live. “Oho!” said Romasa, “you want to know
my age? All right, listen then and I will tell you. This era (yuga)
consists of so many thousands of years. All these years put
together make one day and one night for Brahma. It is
according to these calculations that Brahma’s life is limited to
one hundred years. When one such Brahma dies, one of the
hairs of my body falls out. Corresponding to such deaths as
have already occurred, several of my hairs have fallen out, but
many more remain. When all my hairs fall out, my life will be
over and I shall die.”
Very much surprised at that, they went on to Ashtavakra
Mahamuni, an ascetic with eight distortions in his body. When
they told him about all the above calculations, he said that when
one such Romasa Mahamuni dies, one of his own distortions
would straighten, and when all the distortions had gone, he
would die. On hearing this, Brahma was crestfallen. Similarly,
there are many stories. If true realization is attained, who wants
this body? For a Realised Soul who enjoys limitless bliss through
realization of the Self, why this burden of the body?\n--- 第77页 ---\n69
SSSSS SSSSS
WWWWWEEEEEEEEEETTTTT OOOOOFFFFF PPPPPEEEEEEEEEECCCCCHHHHH
SATI DEVI, THE wife of Siva and the daughter of Daksha,
gave up her life as she was insulted by her father during the
yajna performed by him. She was subsequently born to Himavan
and Menaka as Parvati. She wanted only Lord Siva as her
husband, and to achieve that purpose she set out for doing tapas.
Menaka, while trying to prevent her from doing so said,
“U (no), Ma (give up).” That is how she got the name of Uma.
Finding Menaka’s dissuasion of no use, Himavan took her to
the tapovana (hermitage) where Siva was staying in the form of
Dakshinamurthy and said, “This little child of mine wants to
do tapas. Please allow her to be under your care.” Seeing Parvati,
Siva said, “Why tapas at this tender age? Why not go home
with father?” Parvati replied, “No, I won’t go.” Parameswara
tried to dissuade her skilfully by saying, “I have conquered
prakriti (nature) and so could concentrate on this tapas. If you
are to be here you will be exposed to the ravages of prakriti. So
please go back.” Parvati was equally skilful, so she said, “Oh
Lord! You say you have conquered prakriti. Without some
relationship with prakriti how could you do tapas? You have
just spoken. How could you do that without prakriti? How
could you walk? Without your knowing it, prakriti is occupying
your heart. If it is not for the sake of argument, if you are really
above the influence of prakriti, why are you afraid of my staying
here?” Siva was pleased with this and said, “Ingithagna! (you
who are skilled in thought reading), Madhurvachani! (you who
are sweet of speech) stay on!” and sent Himavan home.\n--- 第78页 ---\n70
PPPPP ’’’’’ TTTTT
AAAAARRRRRVVVVVAAAAATTTTTIIIII SSSSS EEEEESSSSSTTTTT
Sri Bhagavan was looking into the Siva Purana and
related, “Siva has the transcendental and immanent aspects
as represented by His invisible, transcendental being and the
linga aspect respectively. The linga, manifested as Arunachala
originally, stands even to this day.
“In the sphere of speech, Pranava (the mystic sound
AUM) represents the transcendental (nirguna), and the
Panchakshari (the five-syllabled mantra), represents the
immanent aspect (saguna).” To illustrate this Sri Bhagavan
recounted the anecdote of Parvati testing Rama.
RAMA AND LAKSHMANA were wandering in the forest in
search of Sita. Rama was grief-stricken. Just then Siva and Parvati
happened to pass close-by. Siva saluted Rama and passed on. Parvati
was surprised and asked Siva to explain why He, the Lord of the
Universe, being worshipped by all, should stoop to salute Rama,
an ordinary human who having missed his consort was grief-
stricken and moving in anguish in the wilderness looking helpless.
Siva then said, “Rama is simply acting as a human being would
under the circumstances. He is nevertheless the incarnation of
Vishnu and deserves to be saluted. You may test him if you choose.”
Parvati considered the matter, took the shape of Sita and
appeared in front of Rama, as he was crying out the name of
Sita in great anguish. He looked at Parvati appearing as Sita,
smiled and asked, “Why Parvati, are you here? Where is Sambhu?
Why have you taken the shape of Sita?” Parvati felt abashed and
explained how she went there to test him and sought an
explanation for Siva saluting him.
Rama replied, “We are all only aspects of Siva, worshipping
Him at sight and remembering Him out of sight.”\n--- 第79页 ---\n71
GGGGG RRRRR SSSSS
OOOOOIIIIINNNNNGGGGG OOOOOUUUUUNNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE EEEEELLLLLFFFFF
In the evening when some devotees were beginning
giripradakshina, (circumambulation around the hill
Arunachala), Sundaresa Iyer, a long-standing devotee also
felt like going with them. Then feeling that he might not be
able to complete the round, as the others were taking leave,
he quickly went around Bhagavan. Bhagavan asked him
why he was doing this. He replied, “I am afraid I cannot go
around the hill, so I have gone around Bhagavan.” “Go
around yourself That will be Atma pradakshina,” Bhagavan
said with smile.
Another devotee remarked, “It means he has done
what Vinayaka once did”. Bhagavan was then asked to
tell that story.
ONCE UPON A time, Lord Parameswara wanted to teach a
lesson to His Son, Lord Subrahmanya. Along with Parvathi,
Parameswara sat on the top of Mount Kailas holding a fruit in
His hand. Seeing the fruit both Ganapathi and Subrahmanya
asked their Father, Parameswara for it. Then Iswara said that
He would give the fruit to whoever of them returned first after
going round the whole world. With self-confidence and pride
that he would win the race, Subrahmanya started immediately
riding on his favourite mount, the peacock. He began going at
a fast pace, frequently looking behind to assure himself that his
elder brother Ganapathi was not following. What could poor
Ganapathi do, with his huge belly? His vahanam (mount) was
after all a mouse. So he thought it was no use competing with
Subrahmanya in the race round the world, and went round
Parvati and Parameswara, bowed before them and claimed the\n--- 第80页 ---\n72
reward. When they asked him whether he had gone round the
world, he said, “All the worlds are contained within you; so if I
go round you, it is as good as going round the world”. Pleased
with his reply, Parameswara gave him the fruit and Ganapathi
sat there eating it.
By the time Subrahmanya finished going round the
world in full confidence that he would be the winner,
arriving at the starting point, he found Ganapathi seated
before Parvati and Parameswara, eating the fruit. When he
asked Parameswara to give him the fruit for winning the
race, Iswara said, ‘There it is, your elder brother is eating it.’
When he asked his father how that could be fair, Iswara
explained to him all that had happened. Subrahmanya then
realised his vanity in thinking that he was a great sage, bowed
before his parents, and asked to be pardoned. That is the
story. The significance is that the ego which goes round like
a whirlwind must get destroyed, and must get absorbed in
Atma. That is Atma Pradakshina, said Bhagavan.