\n--- 第1页 ---\nSURPASSING LOVE
AND GRACE
BBBBByyyyy HHHHHiiiiisssss dddddeeeeevvvvvooooottttteeeeeeeeeesssss
SSSSSRRRRRIIIII RRRRRAAAAAMMMMMAAAAANNNNNAAAAASSSSSRRRRRAAAAAMMMMMAAAAAMMMMM
TTTTTIIIIIRRRRRUUUUUVVVVVAAAAANNNNNNNNNNAAAAAMMMMMAAAAALLLLLAAAAAIIIII
22222000000000011111\n--- 第2页 ---\n© Sri Ramanasramam
Tiruvannamalai
First edition 2001 - 2000 copies
CC No:
ISBN: 81-88018-60-0
Price: Rs.
Published by
V. S. RAMANAN
President, Board of Trustees
SRI RAMANASRAMAM
Tiruvannamalai 606 603
S. India
Typeset at:
Sri Ramanasramam
Offset by:
Kartik Offset Printers
Madras - 600 015\n--- 第3页 ---\nCONTENTS
Foreword .. vii
1.Reminiscences-I — Viswanatha Swami
—At the Feet of Bhagavan Ramana .. 1
—In the Proximity of Bhagavan .. 5
—With the Two Great Poet-Disciples .. 9
—Two Great Men Meet Bhagavan .. 12
2.From Early Days .. 14
3.Scenes from Ramana’s Life
— B.V. Narasimha Swami .. 19
4.How Bhagavan Came to Me
—Sadhu Trivenigiri Swami .. 30
—Y.N. Athavale .. 33
—Santhanam Iyengar .. 37
—Santha Rangachary .. 39
—Anonymous .. 45
—T.R.A. Narayana .. 49
5.Incidents Connected with the Life of Sri Bhagavan
— M.V. Krishnan .. 55
6.Lessons from Bhagavan’s Life — K.R.K. Murthy .. 60
7.Loving Devotion — T.P.R. .. 62
8.Memorable Days with the Sage of Arunachala
—Swami Desikananda .. 65
—Santi .. 68
9.Sri Bhagavan’s Replies to Questions .. 73
10.Remembering Ramana — Chagganlal Yogi
—Sri Ramana — The Destroyer of Miseries .. 77
—Sri Ramana The Nameless .. 83
—Sri Ramana’s Sense of Equality .. 84
—Sri Ramana’s Sermon of Love .. 89
—Homage to Sri Ramana .. 93
—Ramana — An Embodiment of Silence .. 96
11.Reminiscences-II
—Dr. Haribhai M. Adalja .. 97
—K.R.K. Murthi .. 98\n--- 第4页 ---\niv
—S. Kannikeswarier .. 100
—S. Subramania Iyer .. 101
—R. Narayana Iyer (Sub-Registrar) .. 103
—K. Arunachalam .. 105
—Panthalu Lakshmi Narayana Sastri .. 109
—B.N. Datar .. 114
—Mrs. Merston .. 117
—Sadhu Bramaniam .. 121
—Bharatananda .. 125
—Srimat Puragra Parampanthi .. 128
—Dr. T.N.Krishnaswamy .. 132
—Swami Satyananda .. 133
12.Humour of Sri Bhagavan — Evelyn Kaselow .. 136
13.Conversations with Bhagavan
—Swami Madhava Thirtha .. 139
14.Dreams — A.W. Chadwick .. 148
15.Lest We Forget. . .
—Natesan .. 150
—K. Venkataraman .. 153
16.The Turning Point — Natanananda .. 156
17.Beyond Categories — “Sein” .. 158
18.Arunachala Ashtaka and Siddha Purusha
— Dr M. Anantanarayana Rao .. 160
19.In To Bhagavan’s Fold — K. Padmanabhan .. 169
20.More than a Dream? — T.P.R. .. 172
21.Ramana As I Know Him
—C. Rajagopalachari .. 176
—P.S. Jivanna Rao .. 176
—N. Ponniah .. 178
—Swami Sivananda, Rishikesh .. 181
—Dr M. Anantanarayana Rao .. 183
—Swami Iswarananda .. 188
—Dr T.M.P. Mahadevan .. 190
—M.S. Madhava Rao .. 193
—Dr S.S. Sastry .. 195
22.Silent and Solid Grace — K.R.K. Murthy .. 197\n--- 第5页 ---\nv
23.SRI RAMANA MAHARSHI
—N.N. Rajan .. 202
—Kundalmal A. Mahatani .. 203
—Prof. D. Gurumurti .. 206
24.What is Life? — Dr M. Anantanarayana Rao .. 209
25.With the Sage of the Holy Hill — Dilip Kumar Roy .. 212
26.PEACE THAT PASSETH ALL UNDERSTANDING
—Swami Prasannananda Guru .. 223
—K.R.K. Murthy .. 226
27.Grapefruit — S.S. Cohen .. 229
28.Gospel of Sri Ramana — Swami Pragnananda .. 232
29.Liberation During Last Moments
— Viswanatha Swami .. 235
30.The Great Event — R. Narayana Iyer .. 241
31.A Dialogue — A.W. Chadwick .. 244
32.Bhagavan Sri Ramana — Mrs. Eleanor P. Noye .. 249
33.I Am! I Am! I Am! — P.S. Jivanna Rao .. 251
34.Means and Ends — A.W. Chadwick .. 254
35.Portrait of the Guru — Atmananda Giri .. 257
36.Ramana Lives — A.W. Chadwick .. 259
37.Ramanashram Today — Arthur Osborne .. 263
38.Seekers and “Seekers” — S.S. Cohen .. 270
39.The Maharshi of Arunachala — Sadhu Ekarasa .. 274
40.The Unfinished Game — Ratanlal Joshi .. 282
41.Bhagavan on Reincarnation .. 285
42.Effect of Maharshi’s Picture — A Polish Devotee .. 290
43.Ever-Present — Duncan Greenless .. 292\n--- 第7页 ---\nFFFFFOOOOORRRRREEEEEWWWWWOOOOORRRRRDDDDD
We present in this volume the reminiscences and reflections
on Ramana’s teaching by his devotees. These articles are taken
from The Mountain Path and The Call Divine.
In this collection of articles those devotees who were blessed
enough to sit at his feet share their experiences with the reader.
Here one can find that there is an underlying unity of deep
devotion and love for the Master.
What was the first impression on seeing him? From the
moment Bhagavan’s eyes fell on a devotee, the latter’s heart
went out to him in spontaneous love and reverence. The visit
to Ramanasramam was a shattering experience for some of them.
They literally fell in love with him. This love which had been
awakened was the kind which totally transcended the physical
and material and created an awareness of a different kind of
consciousness which can only be described as a mindless rapture,
pure joy.
What was their experience while they sat in his proximity?
Sitting in his presence one was convinced for the time being
that all troubles were ended and one was forced back on oneself
in spite of all obstacles. And this was the wonder of his presence.
They saw before their eyes the grand manifestation of that
majestic light. They saw the grandeur of that spiritual light before
them. If one could not see it, it was one’s fault.
The most remarkable feature about Bhagavan’s form were
his eyes, extremely penetrating and profoundly fascinating.
Once you had come within the range of those eyes beaming
with love and affection there was no need for any other sadhana.\n--- 第8页 ---\nviii
Once those eyes had rested upon you there was no more fear or
worry for you.
In a great many ways did he shower his love and grace on
them. It is said that love was the force that created the universe.
Perhaps it is. The force of such unselfish love as his, purifies our
hearts, when all other methods prove futile. No other discipline
can give the disciple the true peace which the Master gives. His
affection was always there; and as fire melts ice so his affection
made worries melt.
Sri Maharshi was a centre of love to his disciples. He left
us his love and where else in the world could be found a purifying
power such as this to bring peace to our hearts.
The devotees’s hearts were kindled to deep affection while
he taught them by word and example, while he silently showered
the nectar of grace upon them all.
What was the change in their life after coming to him? It
is an unlocated, pervasive state of being sparked off by some
kind of recognition and it stays with you and you are never the
same again. We may not claim that the devotees’s life was
transformed after seeing him.
No. Most of them got married, set up house, had
children, started a career of their own. Their grihasthasramam
became their main preoccupation. But their visits to
Ramanasramam had done something to them. It had left a
mark on their minds and hearts. Although some of their
material circumstances underwent changes for the worse their
inner life was tranquil, always, since the day they had his
darshan; for invariably they experienced his grace, particularly
when they were most dejected.
Whenever they felt that, that they wanted to go away some
where, away from home, family, friends, books, mistakes, fears
and sorrows, their mind automatically turned to
Ramanasramam. And their body follows. They make the\n--- 第9页 ---\nix
journey to Tiruvannmalai, walk into the Ashram, enter the Hall,
and they are ‘home’ and totally at peace.
The picture of the Ashram and of the Maharshi are always
in their minds like the background curtain of a stage. Whenever
they found that “the world was too much with them” the wish
to go to Ramanasramam possesses them like a hunger. Even
during their busiest hour a sudden look at a picture of the
Maharshi hanging on the wall would momentarily root them
to the spot and the mind would suddenly go blank. Such was,such
is and such ever will be the Maharshi’s influence upon those
who approach with piety and devotion.
In the following pages they speak of him in awed tones
and with overwhelming sensitivity and love. The reader is
invited to participate in this spiritual feast.
Sri Ramanasramam
V.S. Ramanan
Tiruvannamalai 606 603
PRESIDENT
16th May 2001\n--- 第10页 ---\nThat light whose smile kindles the Universe,
That Beauty in which all things work and move,
That Benediction which the eclipsing curse
Of birth can quench not, that sustaining Love
Which through the web of being blindly wove
By man and beast and earth and air and sea,
Burns bright or dim, as each are mirrors of
The fire for which all thirst; now beams on me
Consuming the last clouds of cold mortality.
– P. B. Shelly\n--- 第11页 ---\nRRRRREEEEEMMMMMIIIIINNNNNIIIIISSSSSCCCCCEEEEENNNNNCCCCCEEEEESSSSS-----IIIII
VVVVViiiiissssswwwwwaaaaannnnnaaaaattttthhhhhaaaaa SSSSSwwwwwaaaaammmmmiiiii
IIIII
AAAAA FFFFF BBBBB RRRRR
TTTTT TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE EEEEEEEEEETTTTT OOOOOFFFFF HHHHHAAAAAGGGGGAAAAAVVVVVAAAAANNNNN AAAAAMMMMMAAAAANNNNNAAAAA
MY first darshan of Bhagavan Sri Ramana was in January,
1921 at Skandashram, which is on the eastern slope of
Arunachala and looks like the very heart of the majestic Hill. It
is a beautiful quiet spot with a few coconut and other trees and
a perennial crystal-clear spring. Bhagavan was there as the very
core of such natural beauty.
I saw in him something quite arresting which clearly
distinguished him from all others I had seen. He seemed to live
apart from the physical frame, quite detached from it. His look
and smile had remarkable spiritual charm. When he spoke, the
words seemed to come out of an abyss. One could see
immaculate purity and non-attachment in him and his
movements. I sensed something very refined, lofty and sacred
about him. In his vicinity the mind’s distractions were
overpowered by an austere and potent calmness and the unique
bliss of peace was directly experienced. This I would call Ramana
Lahari, ‘the blissful atmosphere of Ramana’. In this ecstasy of
grace one loses one’s sense of separate individuality and there
remains something grand and all-pervading, all-devouring. This
indeed is the spirit of Arunachala which swallows up the whole
universe by its gracious effulgence.\n--- 第12页 ---\n2
There were about ten devotees living with him there,
including his mother and younger brother. One of them was
Vallimalai Murugar, who for a while every morning sang the
Tamil songs of the Tirupugazh with great fervour. These
well-known songs, the remarkable outpourings of the famous
devotee, Sri Arunagirinathar, are songs in praise of
Subrahmanya. When he sang, Bhagavan used to keep time
(tala) by tapping with two small sticks on the two rings of an
iron brazier of live coal kept in front of him. Fumes of incense
spread out in rolls from the brazier, suffused with the subtle
holy atmosphere of Bhagavan. While Bhagavan’s hands were
tapping at the brazier thus, his unfathomable look of grace
gave one a glimpse of the ‘beyond’ in silence. It was an
unforgettable experience.
There was also a devotee from Chidambaram,
Subrahmanya Iyer, who often sang with great fervour
Tiruvachakam, hymns in praise of Arunachala by Bhagavan,
and songs in praise of Bhagavan also. One morning when he
began a song with the refrain “Ramana Sadguru, Ramana
Sadguru, Ramana Sadguru Rayane,” Bhagavan also joined in
the singing. The devotee was amused and began to laugh at
Bhagavan himself singing his own praise. He expressed his
amusement, and Bhagavan replied, “What is extraordinary about
it? Why should one limit Ramana to a form of six feet? Is it not
the all-pervading Divinity that you adore when you sing
‘Ramana Sadguru, Ramana Sadguru’? Why should I not also
join in the singing?’’ We all felt lifted to Bhagavan’s standpoint.
The inmates of the Ashram used to get up at dawn and
sing some devotional songs in praise of Arunachala and Bhagavan
Ramana before beginning their day’s work. Niranjanananda
Swami told Bhagavan that I could recite hymns in Sanskrit,
and Bhagavan looked at me expectantly. Seeing that it was
impossible to avoid it, I recited a few verses in Sanskrit. When I\n--- 第13页 ---\n3
had finished, Bhagavan gently looked at me and said, “You have
learned all this. Not so in my case. I knew nothing, had learned
nothing before I came here. Some mysterious power took
possession of me and effected a thorough transformation.
Whoever knew then what was happening to me? Your father,
who was intending in his boyhood to go to the Himalayas for
tapas, has become the head of a big family. And I, who knew
nothing and planned nothing, have been drawn and kept down
here for good! When I left home (in my seventeenth year), I
was like a speck swept on by a tremendous flood. I knew not
my body or the world, whether it was day or night. It was difficult
even to open my eyes; the eyelids seemed to be glued down.
My body became a mere skeleton. Visitors pitied my plight as
they were not aware how blissful I was. It was after years that I
came across the term ‘Brahman’ when I happened to look into
some books on Vedanta brought to me. Amused, I said to myself,
‘Is this known as Brahman’!”
One of the earliest devotees, Sivaprakasam Pillai, has referred
to this at the beginning of his brief biography of Bhagavan in
Tamil verse (Sri Ramana Charita Ahaval) as, “One who became
a knower of Brahman without knowing even the term
‘Brahman’.” Sivaprakasam Pillai used to sit in a corner in
Bhagavan’s presence, as the very embodiment of humility.
Finding that I knew a bit of Sanskrit, Bhagavan asked me
to take down a copy of Sri Ramana Gita and give it to my
father. I did so, and it was only after going through it that my
father understood Bhagavan. Yet I myself had not studied its
contents. It was only at the end of 1922 that I happened to go
through the thrilling verses in praise of Bhagavan Ramana and,
profoundly moved, I made up my mind to return to Bhagavan
for good. Thus, Sri Ramana Gita served to give direction to me
in a critical period of my life when I was thinking of dedicating
myself solely to the spiritual pursuit.\n--- 第14页 ---\n4
As it was impossible to get the permission of my father, I
left home unknown to anybody and reached Tiruvannamalai on
the evening of the 2nd of January, 1923. Hearing that Bhagavan
had left Skandashram and was then living in a cottage adjoining
his mother’s samadhi on the southern side of Arunachala, I made
my way straight to it, after meditating for a while at sunset time.
Proceeding round the Hill, I reached the cottage where Bhagavan
was then living. Entering it, I saw Bhagavan reclining peacefully
on an elevated dais. As I bowed and stood before him, he asked
me, “Did you take the permission of your parents to come over
here?” I was caught, and I replied that he need not ask me about
it since he had himself irresistibly attracted me to his feet. With a
smile, Bhagavan advised me to inform my parents of my
whereabouts so that they might be somewhat free from anxiety. I
wrote to my father the next day and saw his letter to the Ashram
enquiring about me the day after.
There was a gathering of devotees there and I came to
know that it was for the forty-third birthday celebration of
Bhagavan the next day. So I learned that I had come to Bhagavan
on the evening of the famous Ardra Darsanam day.
Early next morning there was a gathering of devotees –
they were sitting before Bhagavan. But my attention was
particularly gripped by a radiant personality amidst the
gathering. He was, I came to know, Kavyakantha Ganapati
Sastri. At once I saw that he was not merely a sastri, a learned
man, but a poet and a tapaswin. His broad forehead, bright
eyes, aquiline nose, charming face and beard, and the
melodious ring in his voice – all these proclaimed that he was
a rishi to be ranked with the foremost of the Vedic Seers.
There was authority, dignity and sweetness in his talk and his
eyes sparkled as he spoke. He recited the following verse (sloka)
in praise of Bhagavan, which he had just then composed, and
explained its import:\n--- 第15页 ---\n5
“It is effulgent Devi Uma sparkling in your eyes
dispelling the ignorance of devotees,
It is Lakshmi Devi, the consort of lotus-eyed Vishnu,
alive in your lotus-face,
It is Para Vak Saraswati, the consort of Brahma,
dancing in your talk,
Great Seer, Ramana, the Teacher of the whole world,
How can mortal man praise you adequately?”
IIIIIIIIII
IIIII PPPPP BBBBB
NNNNN TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE RRRRROOOOOXXXXXIIIIIMMMMMIIIIITTTTTYYYYY OOOOOFFFFF HHHHHAAAAAGGGGGAAAAAVVVVVAAAAANNNNN
AFTER THE DEVOTEES who had gathered for the birthday
celebration of Bhagavan left the Ashram, I approached him with
my problem: “How am I to rise above my present animal existence?
My own efforts in that direction have proved futile and I am
convinced that it is only a superior might that could transform me.
And that is what has brought me here.” Bhagavan replied with
great compassion: “Yes, you are right. It is only on the awakening
of a power mightier than the senses and the mind that these can be
subdued. If you awaken and nurture the growth of that power
within you, everything else will be conquered. One should sustain
the current of meditation uninterrupted. Moderation in food and
similar restraints will be helpful in maintaining the inner poise.” It
was this grace of Bhagavan that gave a start to my spiritual career. A
new faith was kindled within me and I found in Bhagavan the
strength and support to guide me forever.
Another day, questioned about the problem of
brahmacharya, Bhagavan replied: “To live and move in Brahman
is real brahmacharya; continence, of course, is very helpful and\n--- 第16页 ---\n6
indispensable to achieve that end. But so long as you identify
yourself with the body, you can never escape sex-thought and
distraction. It is only when you realise that you are formless
Pure Awareness that sex distinction disappears for good and
that is brahmacharya, effortless and spontaneous.”
A week after I arrived, I got the permission of Bhagavan
to live on madhukari, i.e., begged food. In that context,
Bhagavan spoke as follows: “I have experience of it; I lived on
such food during my stay at Pavalakkunru1 to avoid devotees
bringing for me special rich food. It is altogether different from
professional mendicancy. Here you feel yourself independent
and indifferent to everything worldly. It has a purifying effect
on the mind.”
Four months after my arrival at Arunachala, my parents
came there to have darshan of Bhagavan and take me back home.
Though they did not succeed in this latter intention they were
somehow consoled by Bhagavan before they returned. He asked
them if it was possible to wean one from a course one had
taken with all one’s heart and soul. Parents might as a matter of
duty try it if it was a wrong course that one had taken. The
problem did not arise if the course taken was intrinsically good.
My father was a cousin of Bhagavan, four or five years older
than he, and knew him very well as Venkataraman before he left
home for Tiruvannamalai. Though he had heard from others
about Bhagavan’s spiritual greatness and had also gone through
his teaching in Sri Ramana Gita and verses in praise of him by his
(scholar-poet) disciple, Ganapati Muni, he was not sure of what
his reaction would be on seeing Bhagavan. He decided to go to
him with an open mind and see for himself what he was. But the
moment he sighted him in the stone mantapa (on the other side
of the Ashram), he was overpowered by a sense of genuine
1 A small hillock, a spur of Arunachala on the east.\n--- 第17页 ---\n7
veneration, fell at his feet in adoration and said: “There is nothing
of the Venkataraman whom I knew very well in what I see in
front of me!” And Bhagavan replied with a smile: “It is long since
that fellow disappeared once and for all.”
My father then explained that he had not visited him for
so long because he did not have enough of dispassion and
non-attachment to approach him. Bhagavan replied, “Is that
so? You seem to be obsessed by the delusion that you are going
to achieve it in some distant future. But, if you recognise your
real nature, the Self, to what is it attached? Dispassion is our
very nature.”
As the Ashram cottage was being repaired, Bhagavan stayed
in the huge stone mantapa on the other side of the road during
daytime and devotees had darshan of him there. Bhagavan used
to dine with others under the shade of a huge mango tree within
the Ashram premises. The cool, clear water of the Ashram well
was kept in big pots at the foot of the tree. We enjoyed the
shade of the tree and the grace of Bhagavan which like a cool
breeze blew off man’s torments.
As advised by Bhagavan I engaged myself in nonstop japa,
day and night, except during hours of sleep. And I studied
Sri Ramana Gita in the immediate presence of Bhagavan drinking
in the import of every sloka in it. Bhagavan explained to me his
own hymns in praise of Arunachala. Even during his morning and
evening walks I used to follow him, hearing his explanations of his
inspired words. Early one morning there was none else near
Bhagavan and he suggested that we both might go round Arunachala
and return before others could notice his absence and begin to
search for him. He took me by the forest path and suggested that
Sankara’s “Hymn in Praise of Dakshinamurti” might be taken up
for discussion on the way. And within three hours we reached
Pandava Thirtham on the slopes of Arunachala, a little to the east
of the Ashram, where he used to bathe on a few former occasions.\n--- 第18页 ---\n8
I shall not pretend that I understood everything that
Bhagavan said in explaining the import of the hymn, but there
was the spiritual exhilaration of his company in solitude and
that was enough for me.
I had learned by heart, even before coming to Bhagavan,
the three vallis of the famous Taittiriya Upanishad, which is
being chanted every morning before Bhagavan at his Ashram
even today. When I expressed to Bhagavan my aspiration to
learn the import of the Upanishad, he directed me to Ganapathi
Muni, familiarly known as Nayana, who was then living in the
Mango Tree Cave on Arunachala which had been Bhagavan’s
summer residence during his stay at the Virupaksha Cave. It
was a cool spot under a big mango tree with a spring of crystal-
clear water a little above it. I went to the cave and waited at its
outer precincts. Within a few minutes Ganapati Muni came
out. There was the fragrance of tapas in his presence and in the
whole atmosphere. After sitting in silence before him for a few
minutes, I asked him for the explanation of a passage in the
Taittiriya Upanishad embodying the experience of Sage Trisanku,
beginning aham vrikshasya rariva, meaning, ‘I am the Force
operating behind the Tree of Existence’.
Nayana gave such a lucid and illuminating explanation of
it that I decided that there was no need to ask him further
questions; every word coming out of his mouth had scriptural
clarity and sanctity. And yet he used to direct to Bhagavan those
who went to him, saying: “To learn from him first-hand has a
special effect.” And Bhagavan, on his part, used to send those
who approached him in connection with traditional worship to
Nayana, as he was the authority on the subject. Such was the
relationship between the Master and his famous disciple. We
have had opportunities of noticing the special regard Bhagavan
had for this learned poet-disciple who from his early youth had
dedicated his whole life to tapas.\n--- 第19页 ---\n9
IIIIIIIIIIIIIII
WWWWW TTTTT GGGGG PPPPP -----DDDDD
IIIIITTTTTHHHHH TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE WWWWWOOOOO RRRRREEEEEAAAAATTTTT OOOOOEEEEETTTTT IIIIISSSSSCCCCCIIIIIPPPPPLLLLLEEEEESSSSS
SRI MURUGANAR CAME to Bhagavan during September
holidays in 1923. He was then a Tamil Pandit in a Christian
girls high school in Madras. He had studied Tirukural with great
devotion and was following its teachings in his own life. No
wonder he was held in the highest esteem by his pupils as well as
by his fellow teachers.
He came to know of Bhagavan Ramana through some
devotees in Madras as well as Dandapani Swami, who was his
father-in-law. Conditions in his family life also favoured
renunciation: yet he continued working, coming to Bhagavan
during holidays. He was so keenly devoted to Bhagavan that he
used to come direct from his school to Sri Ramanasramam with
his coat and turban on and return to Madras only when his school
reopened. He was drawn to Mahatma Gandhi, whose saintly life
in the midst of worldly activities commanded his respect and
esteem. He composed several poems in praise of him as well as
national songs in general, which were published by Sri Ramana
Padananda in 1943 with the title Sutantara Gitam.
Being a scholar, poet and devotee, he brought to Bhagavan
on his first visit, a decad of verses, in Tamil, each stanza ending
“...desika Ramana ma deve” (Great Lord and Teacher Ramana!).
During one of his later visits in December he composed a poem
beginning, “Annamalai Ramanan...,” in praise of Bhagavan
following the pattern of Tiruvembavai of Tiruvachakam. Seeing
that, Bhagavan suggested to him that he could compose songs
following the themes and plan of Tiruvachakam of
Manikkavachakar. Muruganar felt shocked at the idea and
exclaimed: “Where is Manikkavachakar and where am I?” But
later, he thought it was a prompting from the Master, though\n--- 第20页 ---\n10
gently expressed, and began following the suggestion relying on
Bhagavan’s Grace. And the result is the magnificent collection of
thrilling songs in Tamil, well-known as Sri Ramana Sannidhi
Murai, the third edition of which was published by Sri
Ramanasramam in 1974. Muruganar has also given us Bhagavan’s
teachings in Tamil verse form. The work is known as Guru Vachaka
Kovai ( English translation by Professor K. Swaminathan as
Garland of Guru’s Sayings). There are, moreover, thousands of his
verses being arranged and published in several volumes under
the title Ramana Jnana Bodham.
A few years after his coming to Bhagavan his mother passed
away and Muruganar came and settled down at the feet of his
Master. It was after this that he composed the numerous songs in
Sri Ramana Sannidhi Murai as his devotional offering to Bhagavan.
Scholars who had worked with Muruganar on the Tamil Lexicon
Committee say that Bhagavan Ramana chose a very worthy scholar
to sing his glory. Poets worship the Divine through their poetry.
That alone is sufficient sadhana for them. They are moulded
unawares into the likeness of the object of their worship.
We have to be grateful to Muruganar for making Bhagavan
write “Upadesa Undiyar” (The Essence of all Teaching) and “Ulladu
Narpadu” (Forty Verses on Existence), which are the most important
of Bhagavan’s philosophical works. The beautiful song on “Atma
Vidya” was also composed by Bhagavan at Muruganar’s request.
Muruganar too chose like me to live independently. We
have lived together on the Hill (Arunachala) near the Mango
Tree Cave for some months. Ganapati Muni was then residing
there. He felt an urge to see Bhagavan every evening and be
with him for an hour or two. I used to accompany him. A few
months later a room was found for him in the Palakothu flower
garden adjoining the Ashram on the west. Bhagavan used to go
alone to that side every day after lunch. Sometimes he would
visit that room also.\n--- 第21页 ---\n11
Ganapati Muni once told Bhagavan that he had seen many
other forests, but not the one at Arunachala. Bhagavan, who knew
very well every inch of Arunachala, offered to take the Muni one
day into the interior of the forest. Ganapati Muni could not bear
even the slightest heat of the sun on account of a yogic experience
he had, known as Kapalabheda (breaking of the skull), and so
Bhagavan waited for a cloudy day. Such a day came soon and
Bhagavan asked me if it would suit Nayana to go into the forest
then. I replied that he would gladly jump at the opportunity and
went ahead to his room to inform him of Bhagavan’s intention. In
a few minutes Bhagavan came to our room in Palakothu and we
three set out. Bhagavan took us through the third forest path. After
going for more than a mile, Bhagavan chose a cool and shady spot
adjoining a huge rock to rest a bit. As we were sitting there a rustling
sound was heard indicating someone was approaching, and in a
minute, Muruganar stood before us. Bhagavan put his finger on
his nose and asked him with surprise: “How did you come here?
Even a forest guard could not have found us here,”and Muruganar
replied, “I knew that Bhagavan had promised Nayana to take him
into the forest on some suitable day. I also wanted to join the party
and was coming to the Ashram earlier than usual. But today, not
finding Bhagavan at the Ashram, I proceeded to Palakothu where I
found Nayana’s room locked. I learnt from the watchman Sabhapati
that Bhagavan had gone towards the forest with Nayana and
Viswanathan. I made my way straight to the forest. Going along
the second forest path, I found a footpath going further into the
interior. I took the path and straight I arrived here.” Bhagavan
replied: “Is there a short cut like that? We shall return by it.” Nayana
patted Muruganar and said: “It is an indication of how you are
attuned to Bhagavan by his Grace.” And we returned to the Ashram
before 4 p.m.
I am thrilled when I recollect my intimate contact with
Bhagavan and these two great poet-disciples of his.\n--- 第22页 ---\n12
IIIII VVVVV
TTTTT GGGGG MMMMM MMMMM BBBBB
WWWWWOOOOO RRRRREEEEEAAAAATTTTT EEEEENNNNN EEEEEEEEEETTTTT HHHHHAAAAAGGGGGAAAAAVVVVVAAAAANNNNN
ACHYUTHADASA WAS ONE of the earliest to discern
Sri Bhagavan’s spiritual greatness. He was known as Abboy Naidu
before he renounced the world, and was skilled in playing upon
the mridangam.1 He has composed Tamil kirtanas (songs) of
great merit, which are devotional and Advaitic. Having heard
about Sri Bhagavan he went to Gurumurtham2, the samadhi
temple of a sadhu where Sri Bhagavan was living deeply
immersed in nirvikalpa samadhi, during the closing years of
the Nineteenth Century. He sat in front of Sri Bhagavan and
waited. As Sri Bhagavan who was then a young lad, opened his
eyes, he paid his respects to him, massaged his feet and exclaimed
with great devotional fervour, “One may be a great scholar, an
author or composer and everything else in the world, but it is
indeed very rare to come across any one actually established in
the Self Supreme like you.”
He then announced to his own disciples that there was
“something very rare at Tiruvannamalai,” meaning Sri Bhagavan.
Achyuthadasa’s samadhi is at Kannamangalam, a few miles north
of Arni, in the North Arcot District of Madras State.
This is an instance of how spiritually-minded people were
impressed with Sri Bhagavan’s greatness at the very sight of him,
even in his early years at Tiruvannamalai.
Another great man who visited Sri Bhagavan and was
greatly impressed was Sri Narayana Guru of Kerala. The latter
is well-known in South India as a man of great tapas and a
1 A small drum instrument used at Karnatic musical concerts.
2 Situated near Kilnathur village, an Eastern suburb of Tiruvannamalai.\n--- 第23页 ---\n13
great social and religious reformer. He visited Sri Bhagavan when
he was living at Skandashram. After paying his respects to
Sri Bhagavan he sat silently watching him. People, young and
old, paid their respects to him and sat or passed on, while
Sri Bhagavan sat silently with unblinking, wide-open eyes. He
took no particular notice of anybody. He did not enquire about
the whereabouts of anybody. There was no welcome and no
permission to go. But all the while he was beaming with blissful
joy and the audience was partaking of it. At the invitation of
Sri Bhagavan, Sri Narayana Guru took his lunch with him and
his devotees, and later took leave of him, saying, “May it be the
same way here also”, meaning that he might also be blessed so
as to be established in the Self as Sri Bhagavan. Sri Bhagavan
gave a gracious smile.
On reaching his place, Sri Narayana Guru wrote five verses
in Sanskrit, known as Nivritti Panchakam, and sent it to the
Ashram. The theme of the composition is that he alone enjoys
the peace of release (moksha) who does not allow his mind to
observe or enquire about the differences pertaining to relative
(mundane) existence and has risen above all formalities of
worldly life. Sri Narayana Guru used to be greatly pleased
whenever any of his disciples visited Sri Bhagavan, and used to
listen with delight to the details of their visits.\n--- 第24页 ---\n14
FFFFF EEEEE DDDDD
RRRRROOOOOMMMMM AAAAARRRRRLLLLLYYYYY AAAAAYYYYYSSSSS
This article was culled from Swami Omkar’s monthly
magazine PEACE, dated September 1931. It describes the
first visit of Paul Brunton to Sri Ramanasramam. His book,
A Search in Secret India, did more than anything else in
the early years to make Sri Bhagavan widely known. When
Paul Brunton first came to India he was using the name of
R. Rafael Hurst. Paul Brunton was his pen-name, which he
later permanently adopted because the book he wrote under
it brought him much recognition.
It is interesting to note that an event of a visit from a
foreign journalist to the Ashram was in those far-off days
something to be written about in the newspapers!
IT was half past four in the afternoon and the disciples were
sitting before the Maharishi in the hall and were talking about
a notification that had appeared in the dailies to the effect that a
Mr. Hurst and a Buddhist bhikshu were intending to visit the
Ashram. The clock struck five and there entered the hall a man
in European costume bearing a plate of sweets, followed by a
Buddhist monk. The visitors offered the sweets to the Maharshi
and then, after making obeisance in the Eastern way, they both
squatted on the floor before him. These were the visitors of
whom the disciples had been talking. The man in English clothes
was R. Raphael Hurst, a London journalist who was then on a
visit to India. He was keenly interested in the spiritual teaching
of the East and thought that by an intelligent study and
appreciation of it the cause of cooperation between East and
West might be greatly promoted.\n--- 第25页 ---\n15
He came to Sri Ramanasramam after visiting many other
ashrams. The bhikshu who came with him is also an Englishman
by birth. He was formerly a military officer, but is now known
as Swami Prajnanananda. He is the founder of the English
Ashram at Rangoon. Both visitors sat spellbound before
Maharshi and there was pin-drop silence.
The silence was broken by the person who had brought
the visitors asking them if they would like to ask any questions.
They were, however, not in a mood to do so, and thus an
hour and a half passed. Mr. Hurst then stated the purpose of
his visit. In a voice of intense earnestness, he said that he had
come to India for spiritual enlightenment. “Not only myself,”
he added, “but many others also in the West are longing for
the light from the East.” The Maharshi sat completely indrawn
and paid no attention. One of those who were sitting there
asked them if they had come to the East for a study of
comparative religions. “No,” the bhikshu replied, “we could
get that better in Europe. We want to find Truth; we want the
light. Can we know the truth? Is it possible to get
Enlightenment?” The Maharshi still remained silent and
indrawn, and as the visitors wanted to take a walk the
conversation ended and all dispersed.
Early next morning the visitors entered the hall and put
some questions to the Maharshi with great earnestness. The
conversation reproduced below is from rough notes taken while
it was going on.
Bhikshu: We have travelled far and wide in search of
Enlightenment. How can we get it?
Maharshi: Through deep enquiry and constant meditation.
Hurst: Many people do meditate in the West, but show no
signs of progress.
Maharshi: How do you know that they don’t make
progress. Spiritual progress is not easily discernible.\n--- 第26页 ---\n16
Hurst: A few years ago I got some glimpses of the Bliss,
but in the years that followed I lost it again. Then last year I
again got it. Why is that?
Maharshi: You lost it because your meditation had not
become natural (sahaja). When you become habitually
inturned the enjoyment of spiritual beatitude becomes a
normal experience.
Hurst: Might it be due to the lack of a Guru?
Maharshi: Yes, but the Guru is within. That Guru who is
within is identical with your Self.
Hurst: What is the way to God-realization?
Maharshi: Vichara, asking yourself ‘Who am I?’, enquiry
into the nature of your Self.
Bhikshu: The world is in a state of degeneration. It is getting
constantly worse, spiritually, morally, intellectually and in every
way. Will a spiritual teacher come to save it from chaos?
Maharshi: Inevitably. When goodness declines and wrong
prevails He comes to reinstate goodness. The world is neither
too good nor too bad: it is a mixture of (both) the two. Unmixed
happiness and unmixed sorrow are not found in the world.
The world always needs God and God always comes.
Bhikshu: Will He be born in the East or in the West?
The Maharshi laughed at the question but did not
answer it.
Hurst: Does the Maharshi know whether an avatara already
exists in the physical body?
Maharshi: He might.
Hurst: What is the best way to attain Godhood?
Maharshi: Self-enquiry leads to Self-Realization.
Hurst: Is a Guru necessary for spiritual progress?
Maharshi: Yes.
Hurst: Is it possible for the Guru to help the disciple forward
on the path?\n--- 第27页 ---\n17
Maharshi: Yes.
Hurst: What are the conditions for discipleship?
Maharshi: Intense desire for Self-realization, earnestness
and purity of mind.
Hurst: Does a Guru want to take control of the disciple’s
worldly affairs also?
Maharshi: Yes, everything.
Hurst: Can he give the disciple the spiritual spark that he
needs?
Maharshi: He can give him all that he needs, this can be
seen from experience.
Hurst: Is it necessary to be in physical contact with the
Guru, and if so for how long?
Maharshi: It depends on the maturity of the disciple.
Gunpowder catches fire in an instant, while it takes time to
ignite coal.
Hurst: Is it possible to develop along the path of the Spirit
while leading a life of work?
Maharshi: There is no conflict between work and wisdom.
On the contrary, selfless work paves the way to Self-knowledge.
Hurst: If a person is engaged in work it will leave him
little time for meditation.
Maharshi: It is only spiritual novices who need to set
aside a special time for meditation. A more advanced person
always enjoys the beatitude whether he is engaged in work or
not. While his hands are in society he can keep his head cool
in solitude.
Bhikshu: Have you heard of Meher Baba?
Maharshi: Yes.
Bhikshu: He says that he will become an avatara in a few
years.
Maharshi: Every one is an avatara of God: “The kingdom
of heaven is within you.” Jesus, Mohammed, Buddha, Krishna,\n--- 第28页 ---\n18
all are in you. One who knows the Truth sees every one else as a
manifestation of God.
Bhikshu: Will the Maharshi make a statement about
Meher Baba?
Maharshi: What statement? That (the existence of an outer
avatara) is a question which seekers of Truth need not consider.
Bhikshu: Will the world be rejuvenated?
Maharshi: There is One who governs the world and it is
His business to look after it. He who has created the world
knows how to guide it also.
Bhikshu: Does the world progress now?
Maharshi: If we progress the world progresses. As you are
so is the world. Without understanding the Self what is the use
of understanding the world? Without Self-knowledge,
knowledge of the world is of no use. Dive inwards and find the
treasure hidden there. Open your heart and see the world through
the eyes of the true Self. Tear aside the veils and see the Divine
Majesty of your own Self.\n--- 第29页 ---\n19
SSSSSCCCCCEEEEENNNNNEEEEESSSSS FFFFFRRRRROOOOOMMMMM
RRRRRAAAAAMMMMMAAAAANNNNNAAAAA’’’’’SSSSS LLLLLIIIIIFFFFFEEEEE
BBBBB..... VVVVV..... NNNNNaaaaarrrrraaaaasssssiiiiimmmmmhhhhhaaaaa SSSSSwwwwwaaaaammmmmiiiii
IIIII
June 29,1929
THE evening was calm but cloudy. Occasionally it would
drizzle and in consequence it was somewhat cool. The
windows of the Ashram hall were closed and Maharshi was seated
as usual on the sofa. A number of devotees sat on the floor
facing him. Mr. A. S. K., the sub-judge of Cuddalore, had come
to see the Maharshi accompanied by two elderly ladies, his aunt
and his cousin. He was also accompanied by Raghupati Sastri, a
pleader of Cuddalore. Of the inmates and regular visitors there
were about seven or eight, including Sri Niranjanananda Swami
(Chinnaswami), Echammal, Ganapathi Bhat, Visvanathan Iyer,
Muruganar, and Madhavan.
It was about 6-00 p.m., and the conversation was mainly
carried on by the Maharshi and the Cuddalore visitors. Mr. A.
S. K. started the discussion as to the impermanence of all
mundane things by putting the question: “Has sat-asat-vicharana
(enquiring into the real and the unreal) the efficacy, per se, to
lead us to the realization of the One Imperishable?”
Maharshi: As propounded by all and realised by all true
seekers after the Truth, Brahma-Nishtha (abidance in Brahman)\n--- 第30页 ---\n20
alone, if one may say so, can make us know and realise it, as
being of us and in us. Any amount of vivechana (discrimination)
can lead us only one step forward by making us tyaginah
(renouncers), by goading us to discard the abhasa (the fleeting),
and to hold fast only to the Eternal Truth and Presence.
Then the conversation turned upon the question as to
whether Iswara prasad (the grace of God) is necessary for the
attainment of samrajyam (Self rule) or whether an individual’s
honest and strenuous effort to attain it cannot, of itself, lead us
to that from where there is no return. The Maharshi, with an
ineffable smile which affected everyone present, replied:
“Iswara prasadam is essential to realisation. It leads to God
realization. But Iswara prasadam is vouchsafed only to him who
is a true bhakta or a yogin who has striven hard and ceaselessly
on the path towards freedom. . .”
Sri Raghupati then proceeded to question the Maharshi
about the six yogic centres (adharas).
R: The six adharas are mentioned. But the jiva (individual
soul) is said to reside in the heart. Is that not so?
M: Yes. The jiva is said to remain in the heart in sushupti
(deep sleep) and in the brain in waking hours. The heart need
not be taken to be the fleshy or muscular cavity with four chambers
which propels the blood. There are indeed passages which support
the idea. The description that it resembles the bud of the lotus,
that it is above the navel and between the nipples, that the blood
vessels terminate there appear to confirm that view. There is the
stanza in “Forty Verses on Reality,” Supplement, v. 18, to the
same effect. But there are many who hold that the term ‘heart’
denotes a set of ganglia or nerve centres about that region.
Whichever view is correct does not matter to us. We are not
concerned with anything less than our Self. About that we have
certainty within ourselves. No doubts or discussions arise there.
The ‘heart’ is used in the Vedas and Shastras to denote the place\n--- 第31页 ---\n21
whence the notion ‘I’ springs. Does it spring only from this fleshy
ball? No. It springs from within us somewhere right in the middle
of our being. The ‘I’ really has no locality. Everything is our self.
There is nothing but That. So the heart must be said to be our
entire body and the entire universe conceived as ‘I’. But for the
practice of the abhyasi (spiritual aspirant) we have to indicate a
definite part of the universe or body, and so this heart is pointed
out as the seat of the Self. But, in truth, we are everywhere. We
are all that is and there is nothing else.
R: The six adharas, are they not the seats of the soul?
M: Those six are stated to be the seats of the soul for the
spiritual aspirant’s contemplation. He should fix his attention
on muladhara first, think of the Self as residing there, and
gradually go higher up.
R: There is a description of each of the six as the seat of a
God, or a figure with a varying number of sides, and with a
varying number of faces.
M: Yes. These are for purposes of concentration. They are
interpreted symbolically.
R: There is a difference of opinion between two schools as
to the order of the adharas. Sir John Woodroffe mentions that
some (probably the Nepalese) place the anahata (the heart) next
to muladhara, i.e., as the second of the six.
M: Yes, there may be variations. But the usual order here is
muladhara, swadishtana, manipuraka, anahata, visuddhi, ajna,
and sahasrara chakra on the top of all these six.
R: The muladhara is said to be triangular.
M: Yes. We may think of the muladhara or Self therein as
arising from a three-sided figure.
R: The kundalini is said to rise from that.
M: Yes. That current is ourselves. By meditating on each
adhara, the current advances higher and higher and various
powers are said to develop.\n--- 第32页 ---\n22
R: It is said that Iswara prasadam is necessary to attain
successful samadhi. Is that so?
M: We are Iswara. By Iswara drishti (seeing ourselves as
Iswara) we are having Iswara prasadam. So we need Iswara
prasadam to obtain Iswara prasadam.
Maharshi smiles as he says this and the devotees all laugh.
R: There is Iswara anugraham (grace). That is said to be
distinct from Iswara prasadam.
M: The thought of Iswara is Iswara prasadam. His nature
is arul or prasadam, i.e., grace. It is by Iswara’s grace you think
of Iswara.
R: Is not Guru anugraham the result of Iswara anugraham?
M: Why distinguish between the two? The Guru is viewed
as Iswara and not as distinct from Iswara.
R: When an endeavour is made to lead the right life and
to concentrate thought on our Self, there is often a downfall
and break. What is to be done then?
M: It will come all right in the end. There is the steady
impulse of your determination that sets you on your feet again
after every fall or breakdown. Gradually the obstacles disappear
and your current gets stronger. Everything comes right in the
end. Steady determination is the thing required.
IIIII IIIII
A day in 1929 (date not given)
SRI N. NATESIER, advocate of Madura, arrived this morning
at 7-30 a.m. with his family and paid his respects to the
Maharshi. He quoted a verse from the Bhagavad Gita and then
asked: “How are doubts removed?”\n--- 第33页 ---\n23
Maharshi: By granthichhedan (cutting the knot).
N. Natesier: “All karmas get destroyed on seeing it.” How
are we to have that experience? How does this illusion arise and
to whom? How is it removed?
M: Instead of pursuing these inquiries as to how illusion
arises and how it is removed, it is sufficient if we solve first the
question ‘To whom?’ it arises and then all questions are solved.
N. N: The doubts arise in my mind and to me. The books
say that I must know myself and learn my own nature. But
how is this to be done?
M: Seek your source. Find out whence the thought I
springs.
N.N: How is that to be done? I don’t find that easy.
M: Do we not see things and know them clearly? But what
object can we be surer of and know more certainly than our Self?
This is direct experience and cannot be further described.
N.N: If we cannot see the Self, what is to be done?
M: Strenuous endeavour to know the Self. Develop the
antarmukham or introspective attitude. Constantly put before
your mind the query “What am I?” and in time you will be able
to see your Self. How can you see your Self? You can see that
which you have not seen before. But as to what you are always
experiencing, there is no drishti (vision), strictly speaking. By
drishti, the removal of the hindrance, viz., the idea that you are
not seeing the Self, is meant.
N.N: It is said there are trimurtis (three aspects of God)
and that Vishnu is in Vaikunthalokam (a heavenly region). Is
that a real world, real like this world, or is it only a fiction?
M: If you and others and this world are real, why are
Mahavishnu and Vaikuntha unreal? So long as you consider
this reality, that also is reality.
N.N: I am not referring to the Advaita state or truth that
Brahman alone is real and all else is fiction (mithya). But I am\n--- 第34页 ---\n24
trying to find out if, in vyavahara (empirical) stage, accepting
the standards for truth that we have here, Vaikuntha is true.
Trikalabadhyam satyam (true in all three states) is not the
standard I take. In vyavahara, this body exists now and though
it may not be found at other times, it is satyam or true in one
sense. In that sense, is Vaikuntha true? Does it exist?
M: Why not?
N.N: Are Mahavishnu, Siva, etc., then included among
jivakoties?
M: There are jivas and Iswara. Jivas are not the only
beings known.
N.N: Is there pralaya (dissolution) for Mahavishnu, etc.,
and do these trimurtis also meet with their end? Or are they
eternal? Do they exist with a body, like this panchabhutika (made
of the five elements) body of ours? Have they a vyavaharika
satyatwam (empirical reality)?
M: Instead of pursuing the inquiry in that direction, why
don’t you turn attention on yourself? To whom does the notion
of Vaikuntha and Vishnu arise?
N.N: Is Mahavishnu or Vaikuntha a mere notion or idea?
M: Everything to you is a notion. Nothing appears to you
except through the mind and as its notions.
N.N: Then Vishnu and Vaikuntha are creatures of my
imagination and pure fiction? They have no more reality than
the snake fancied in the rope or sasa-vishanam, the hare’s horn?
M: No. When you consider your body and life and other
things as real, how can you treat Mahavishnu or Iswara as unreal?
if you are real, he is real, too.
N.N: It is not about reality in that sense that I am asking.
Sasa-vishanam, for example, never exists. None has seen it. It is
a case of atyantika abhavam (absolute nonexistence), whereas
this body is felt and exists at least as an object of sense
experienced for the present. There is a difference between the\n--- 第35页 ---\n25
two sorts of abhavam. Can it be said that Vaikuntha is as unreal
as sasa-vishanam, the hare’s horn?
M: No. Just as you experience this world and this body
and say it is true, there are others who have experienced
Vaikuntha, the Vishnulokam, and say that is true. Why call that
alone unreal, while you talk of your sense experience as real?
N.N: Then Vaikuntha must exist somewhere. Where is
it?
M: It is in you.
N.N: Then it is only my idea, what I can create and control?
M: Everything is like that – your idea.
N.N: That is coming back to the Advaitic idea. But what I
wish to know, is there a separate person like ourselves who is
phaladata, the rewarder of virtue and the punisher of sins?
M: Yes.
N.N: Has he an end? Does he get dissolved in pralaya?
M: Pralaya is for the soul held by maya. If you can, with
all your defects and limitations, rise by jnana into realisation of
the Self, and above all pralaya and samsara, is it not reasonable
to expect that Iswara, who is infinitely more intelligent than
you, is above and beyond pralaya?
N.N: I have my doubts yet.
M: He who has doubts will go on doubting up to the end
of the world.
N.N: No. I am anxious to get rid of that doubt and
request you to remove my doubts begotten of ignorance. Pray,
enlighten me.
M: Enlighten yourself by realising your Self.
N.N: That I am unable to do. In spite of my desire to
shake off all doubts, they cling to me. That is why I seek help.
My present doubts about the reality of the existence of other
worlds have been long with me. Are devas and pisachas true?
M: Yes.\n--- 第36页 ---\n26
IIIIIIIIIIIIIII
THIS IS A conversation between the Maharshi and Bezwada
Sundararama Reddi from the Nellore district. It took place on
the morning of 23-2-30.
Bezwada: What to do to get moksha?
Maharshi: Learn what moksha is.
B: Should I not leave wife and family?
M: What harm do they do? First find out what you are.
B: Should not one give up wife, home, wealth, etc.?
M: Well, first learn what samsara is. Is all that samsara? Are
there not people who live in their midst and get realization?
B: What steps should I take as sadhana?
M: That depends on your qualifications and stage.
B: I am going on with vigraharadhana (worship of a form
of God).
M: Go on. That leads to chitta ekagrata (one-pointedness).
Get one-pointed. All will come right. People fancy moksha is
somewhere and has to be searched for after kicking out samsara.
Moksha is knowing yourself within yourself. Keep on to a single
thought. You will progress. Your mind itself is samsara.
B: My mind is being too much tossed. What to do?
M: Fix yourself to one thing and try to hold on to it. All
will come right.
B: I find concentration difficult.
M: Go on practising. Your concentration must come as
easy as your breathing. That would be the crown of achievement.
B: Brahmacharya, sattvic ahara, etc., are all helpful, are
they not?
M: Yes, all that is good.
Then Maharshi is silent, gazing at vacancy and
setting an example to the questioner for him to imitate
and follow immediately.\n--- 第37页 ---\n27
B: Do I not require yoga?
M: What is that but concentration?
B: To help in that, is it not better to have aids?
M: Breath regulation, etc., are of much help.
B: Is it not possible to get a sight of God?
M: Yes. You see this and that. Why not see God? Only you
must know what God is. All are seeing God always. Only they
don’t realize it. Find out what God is. People see and yet they
don’t see, because they don’t know God.
B: Should I not go on with kirtan, nama japa, etc., when I
worship?
M: Yes. Manasa japa (mental repetition) is very good. That
helps with dhyana. The mind gets identified with that japa and
then you know what real puja is – the losing of one’s individuality
in that which is worshipped or revered.
B: Is Paramatma always different from us?
M: The difference is the view a man has now. But by
thinking of him as not different, you achieve identity.
B: That is Advaita, is it not? Becoming oneself.
M: Where is becoming? The thinker is all the while the
same as the Real. He ultimately realizes that fact. Sometimes we
forget our identity, i.e., as waking individual self. In sleep
Bhagavan is perpetual consciousness.
B: Is not the Guru’s guidance needed in addition to
idol worship?
M: How did you start without advice?
B: From puranas, etc.
M: Yes. Someone tells you, or Bhagavan himself, in which
latter case He (God) is your Guru. What matters it who the
Guru is? We really are one with the Guru and Bhagavan. The
Guru is really Bhagavan. We discover that in the end. There is
no difference between them. “Guru is God” is the idea.
B: If we have some merit the search will not leave us.\n--- 第38页 ---\n28
M: Yes. You will keep your effort that way.
B: Will not a cleverer man be a great help in pointing out
the way?
M: Yes, but if you go on working with available light you
will meet your Guru, as he will be seeking you himself.
B: Is there a difference between prapatti (surrender) and
the yoga of the rishis?
M: Jnana marga and bhakti or prapatti advocated by Sri
Aurobindo are the same. The goal is the same. Self-surrender leads
to it like enquiry. Complete self-surrender means you have no
further thought of ‘I’. That is what bhakti leads to, and also jnana.
Then all your samskaras are washed off and you are free. You should
not continue as a separate entity at the end of either course.
B: Don’t we attain swarga (heavenly regions) as a fruit of
our actions?
M: Why? That is as true as our present existence in this
world. But, if we enquire what we are and discover the Self,
what need is there to think of swarga, etc.?
B: Should I not try to escape from birth and death?
M: Yes. Find out who is born, and who has the trouble of
existence now. When you are asleep do you think of birth and
trouble, etc.? You think of it now. So find out whence this trouble
arose and you have the solution. You discover none is born. There
is no birth, no trouble, no unhappiness in fact. Everything is That.
All is bliss. We are then freed from rebirth in truth. Why feel misery?
B: Chaitanya and Ramakrishna wept before God and
achieved success.
M: Yes. They had a powerful shakti drawing them through
those experiences. Entrust yourself to that power to take you
on to your goal. Tears are often referred to as a sign of weakness.
We cannot attribute weakness to these great ones. These
symptoms are passing manifestations while the great current is
carrying them on. Let us look to the end achieved.\n--- 第39页 ---\n29
B: Can this physical body be made to disappear into
nothingness?
M: Why this query? Why not find out if you are this body?
B: Can’t we appear and disappear like Viswamitra and other
rishis?
M: These are debates about physical matters. Is that our
essential object of interest? Are you not the Atman? Why think
about other matters? Seek the essence. Reject other disquisitions
as useless. Those who believe that moksha consists in
disappearance err. No such thing is needed. You are not the
body. What matters it how the body disappears – in one way or
another. There is no merit in disappearance of body in one way
over the other. Everything is one. Where is superiority or
inferiority in the one? See Chap. XIV of Ramana Gita. The loss
of the ‘I’ is the central fact – and not of the body. It is the
dehatma buddhi (the idea that I am the body) that is your
bondage. It is the discarding of it and perceiving the Real that
matters. Should you pound to pieces something golden before
seeing it is gold? What matters if it is round or powdered when
you perceive the truth of its being gold? The dying man does
not see this body. It is the other man who thinks about the
manner in which the body dies. The realized have no death.
Whether the body is active or drops off, he is equally conscious
and sees no difference. To him nothing is superior to the other.
To an outsider also, the manner of disappearance of a mukta’s
body is unimportant. Mind your own realisation and after that
it will be time enough to see which form of death is preferable!
Are you the body? During night, when you are fast asleep
have you body consciousness?
B: No.
M: What exists always, is the ‘I’.\n--- 第40页 ---\n30
HHHHHOOOOOWWWWW BBBBBHHHHHAAAAAGGGGGAAAAAVVVVVAAAAANNNNN
CCCCCAAAAAMMMMMEEEEE TTTTTOOOOO MMMMMEEEEE
IIIII
SSSSSaaaaadddddhhhhhuuuuu TTTTTrrrrriiiiivvvvveeeeennnnniiiiigggggiiiiirrrrriiiii SSSSSwwwwwaaaaammmmmiiiii
WHEN I was in Tiruchendur in 1932 it came to my mind
that I should regard all women as my mother or Valli if
I was intent on leading a spiritual life. One evening, I went to
the Shrine of Sri Subramanya and stood for half an hour before
the Moolavar (main deity) and the following words flashed into
my consciousness: “Here I am a God who does not talk. Go to
Tiruvannamalai; Maharshi is a God who talks.” This was how
Maharshi’s Grace manifested itself to me. I had not even seen
Maharshi then.
In December 1932, I wrote to Ramanasramam and got
the reply conveying Bhagavan’s upadesa that the body is the
result of prarabdha (accumulated karma) and the joys and
sorrows relating to it are inevitable and they can be borne easily
if we put the burden on God.
In 1933, one day, Vakil Sri Vaikuntam Venkatarama Iyer
suddenly spoke to me about Maharshi and gave me a copy of
Ramana Vijayam in Tamil. I read it and when I came to the
part when his mother was crying before him to urge him to
return home I was choked with tears.\n--- 第41页 ---\n31
Then my mother made the following inspired utterance.
“Malaiappan calls you; go to him. This path will result in the
salvation of twenty-seven generations of your family. This is
the upadesa (teaching) of Mother Truth. Go along this path.
Any obstacle you meet, regard as maya (illusion). You will soon
be liberated.” So saying, I was given upadesa of Mahavakyam
and Karana-Panchaksharam (Vedic truth of Brahman).
In February 1933, I wrote to the Ashram again and got a
prompt reply. Bhagavan’s upadesa given in it was as follows: “Sattvic
food will keep the mind clear and help meditation. This is the
experience of sadhakas. Eat to appease hunger and not to satisfy
taste or craving; this will in due course lead to the control of the
senses. Then continued and concentrated meditation will result
in annihilation of desires.” It is the Atman that activates the mind
and breath. Watching the breath will result in kevala kumbakam
(stopping of breath). Control of breath will lead to temporary
control of the mind and vice versa. Intense and constant japa
(repetition of a sacred syllable) will lead to ajapa (non-repetition).
Sound being subtler than form, japa is preferable to murti (image
or form) or worship. Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman) is the
best. To those who seek the source of the ‘I’ no other mantra or
upasana (meditation) is needed.”
Within a month after the receipt of this, I proceeded to
Ramanasramam to stay there permanently. One day I decided to
spend the nights for one mandala (cycle of 48 days) in the presence
of Bhagavan. On the 15th day I had a dream: The attendant
Madhavan had an epileptic attack and suddenly grasped my hand.
I cried for help to Bhagavan who pulled away Madhavan’s hand,
and gave me milk to drink. When I woke up I still had the taste
of the milk in my mouth; I felt I had drunk the milk of wisdom.
From then onward my mind turned inwards.
One morning while cutting vegetables, I wanted to do
giri pradakshinam (circumambulation of the Hill) and asked\n--- 第42页 ---\n32
Bhagavan’s permission. Devotees nearby made signs pleading
to Bhagavan not to let me go. Bhagavan said, “Is pradakshina a
sankalpa (intention)? Let him go.” I said, “No. I decided last
night to go with somebody. That is all.” Bhagavan, “Oh! You
already made the sankalpa. Sankalpa leads to samsara. Fulfil the
sankalpa. You need not cut vegetables.” I took it as an upadesa
(teaching) not to make sankalpas thereafter.
Another morning when I was cutting vegetables with
Bhagavan, he said: “Sundaram! Take this hurricane light and
pick up the mangoes that have fallen from the tree.” I said
“Yes”, but continued cutting up the vegetables. Bhagavan said,
“Sundaram! Attend to what ‘I’ said first. It is from me that
everything rises. Attend to it first.” I took this as an adesh and
upadesa (advice and instruction) to make the enquiry “Who am
I?” My friends also felt so.
One day the attendant Madhavan was binding a book. A
devotee wanted a book from the library. Bhagavan asked
Madhavan to get it saying, “You do my work; I will do your
work.” And Bhagavan took the book and went on with the
binding while Madhavan got the library book. A devotee
interpreted this as follows: “My work means looking after the
needs which arise in the minds of devotees for anything from
Bhagavan. Your work is to get liberation which is not possible
without Bhagavan’s Grace and help.” Bhagavan heard this
comment and said “Hum Hum! That is what it is !”
Once when meditating in the presence of Bhagavan, the
mind persisted in wandering. I couldn’t control it. So I gave up
meditation and opened my eyes. Bhagavan at once sat up and
said, “Oh! You abandon it thinking it is the swabhava (nature)
of the mind to wander. Whatever we practise becomes the
swabhava. If control is practised persistently that will become
the swabhava.” Yet another upadesa for me.\n--- 第43页 ---\n33
IIIII IIIII
YYYYY..... NNNNN..... (((((aaaaallllliiiiiaaaaasssss BBBBBhhhhhaaaaauuuuurrrrraaaaaooooo))))) AAAAAttttthhhhhaaaaavvvvvaaaaallllleeeee
BEFORE I HAD the first darshan of Sri Bhagavan in 1942, I
was brought up in a religious and spiritual atmosphere at home.
Ever since 1914, I used to visit Alandi, near Poona, to have
darshan of the samadhi of the Maharashtrian saint, Jnaneshwara.
About 90 years ago, there stayed in Alandi a great realised saint
and yogi, Swami Narasimha Saraswati. My grandfather was his
staunch disciple and the Swami’s grace has been showered on
our family ever since then. Even though the Swami left this
world and was enshrined in samadhi before my birth, I knew
that many devotees had the good luck to have his darshan even
after his nirvana. I also felt ardently that I should have his
darshan in flesh and blood and I used to pray to him for many
years. In spite of many happy incidents of grace in our family,
my yearning for his darshan remained unsatisfied and I was
rather insistent on it. I was not satisfied with his darshan in a
dream and so continued to pray for the same off and on.
From 1939 to 1942 I suffered from sciatica due to
overexertion in my engineering work, and became very weak.
As I did not like in this state to be a burden to my old father I
went to Vai, a sacred place on the bank of the Krishna, about
fifty miles away from Poona, rather dejected about my health.
Still I used to pray to the Swami of Alandi to give me darshan.
But because my prayer was not granted and I was not feeling
well, I made a slight change in my prayer that I should at least
have a darshan of a great Mahatma like the Swami before my
death. After a month or so, in February 1942, when I was in a
state of utter depression, I had a wonderfully vivid vision-like
dream at dawn.\n--- 第44页 ---\n34
In a cave of a mountain, a great mahatma was staying and
throngs of people of different religions and castes, sannyasis,
yogis and householders were going up the mountain towards
the cave to listen to the speech of the mahatma. I was one of
them. The cave was spacious enough to hold the 150-200 people
who had assembled there and were sitting close to one another
in a crowd. I also sat there among them, waiting. I waited for
an hour or so and still the speaker was not seen nor heard.
Naturally I was bored and asked the people around me, “How
is it that the lecture has not started yet? Where is the Saint?”
Near me sat an old man with matted hair. Afterwards I came to
know that his name was Kavya Kanta Vasistha Ganapati Muni.
He raised his hand and said to me, “Silence of the Master is his
speech and the disciples have no doubts left.” I was wonder
struck to hear this, as I could not understand who that silent
Master was and could not follow his silent speech. So again I
asked, “Where is the Master?” He replied, “He is sitting quite
near you.” I began to search among the people near me and
found a slender young man of twenty-two years wearing a white
codpiece and a smile on his face. I bowed down to him
immediately and asked whether I could know his name and
would understand the silent speech. He pointed his finger to
his heart and said in Marathi, “This is known as Ramana
Maharshi.” Having said this he smiled in a charming manner
and instantly I woke up in delight. I took it to be the answer to
my constant repeated prayer, felt happy and began to reflect.
Though a resident of Poona, I did not hear much about
Ramana Maharshi’s greatness then (in 1942) as his name was not
then well known in Maharashtra. In a big library there were one
or two books of Paul Brunton, but very few people would read
them. A few educated pilgrims visiting Rameswaram might have
heard his name in the Madras province. But in a distant town
like Vai, nobody knew Bhagavan’s name and hence it was very\n--- 第45页 ---\n35
difficult to account for my vision. For about ten or twelve days I
was eagerly longing to get some information about him. All the
while, I was praying. All of a sudden, one day a gentleman of my
acquaintance from Poona happened to meet me and having seen
the photograph of Narasimha Saraswati Swamy on my table,
instantly remembered something and told me that recently, during
his pilgrimage to Rameswaram he heard from some pilgrims about
Sri Ramana Maharshi, and went along with them to
Tiruvannamalai and had his blissful darshan. He further told me
that Bhagavan was a Siddha Purusha (a liberated Being) like this
Swami and advised me to go and have his darshan once.
Thus unexpectedly my dream was accounted for and
immediately I sent money by telegraphic money order for two
or three books of Bhagavan. My curiosity and longing were
intense. In four or five days the books came but before I could
read them, a friend of mine took them away and when I wrote
to him, he ordered them again, and in the next week I got
them. Their reading increased my longing to see Bhagavan.
Even though I had become very weak due to the disease, my
earnest desire to have Bhagavan’s darshan did not allow me to
keep quiet. I started in that very condition by rail and reached
Tiruvannamalai station on the third day at dawn. I hired a horse-
cart and reached Sri Ramanasramam at 6 a.m. The driver showed
me that Bhagavan was coming towards us. My joy knew no
bounds. As I prostrated before him Bhagavan approached me
and said, “Have you come from Poona? You seem to be quite
exhausted.” I was wonder struck to hear this, as I had not written
to the Ashram about my whereabouts and the date of my coming
there. Thereafter arrangements were made for my stay.
In the afternoon, when I sat before him in the Meditation
Hall, he enquired about my health. I replied that I had been
suffering terribly from sciatica for three years, had no sleep, no
desire for food and was growing from bad to worse in spite of\n--- 第46页 ---\n36
the treatment of the best doctors. I further told him that my
father was old, my children were young and my young wife
helpless, and being extremely pestered by the disease I continued
praying to Swami Narasimha Saraswati of our family and as a
result was blessed by Bhagavan’s darshan in a vision-like dream
and hence had come there. I handed over the Swami’s
photograph to Sri Bhagavan. He smiled and indicated his divine
intimacy with the Swami. He graciously said to me, “You can
stay here in peace. Your disease is not incurable.” He quoted a
verse from the Bhagavad Gita, (II: 14): “O son of Kunti, the
contacts between the senses and their objects, which give rise to
the feelings of heat and cold, pleasure and pain, etc., are
transitory and fleeting. O Arjuna, bear them,” and pacified me.
I felt extremely relieved. In three or four months I was
completely cured of the disease by his grace.
Thereafter I used to see him three or four times a year up
to 1950, and came in close contact with him. He rejuvenated
me physically and spiritually and brought me eternally into the
fold of his benign Grace, to describe which I have no words.
On receiving a telegram I came to the Ashram on the day
of his mahasamadhi. My emotions and feelings were checked
somehow during the day he left the body. But next day, at night,
when everybody was asleep, I began to weep bitterly feeling
very uneasy that I shall never henceforth see Bhagavan in an
embodied form and enjoy the bliss of his presence. All of a
sudden in the dead of night, some footsteps were heard and lo!
there came Bhagavan with a lantern in his hand! He straightaway
approached me, removed the curtain and said to me in a soft,
gentle, loving voice, “Oh! Why do you weep? Did I not tell
you that I am here?” I controlled myself and bowed down to
him. By the time I raised my head, he had disappeared, leaving
me in utter surprise and desolation. My thousand pranams to
Ramana Bhagavan.\n--- 第47页 ---\n37
IIIIIIIIIIIIIII
SSSSSaaaaannnnnttttthhhhhaaaaannnnnaaaaammmmm IIIIIyyyyyeeeeennnnngggggaaaaarrrrr
UNTIL MY THIRTY-SECOND year I did not have any special
inclination for spiritual pursuits. I was living with my wife in
Tanjavur where I was a teacher. But suddenly my outlook on
life changed. I distinctly remember even now the exact date on
which it happened. It started with a vivid sense of the
impermanence of all the things which I had valued in life. I
realised that God is the only unchanging Reality. I therefore
began to adore him and to pray to him in the usual manner by
reciting hymns of praise like “Dakshinamurthi Stotra” and
“Subrahmanya Bhujanga Stotra” of Sankaracharya, the “Dhyana
Sopana” of Vedanta Desika and “Mukundamala” of Kulasekhara.
Sometimes tears flowed from my eyes while reciting them.
Shortly after this my wife died. Although I was only
thirty-three at that time I did not remarry. The worldly life
had lost its charm for me. I continued my daily prayers. To
the hymns of praise I added nama japa or the repetition of
the name of Rama, into which I was initiated by one Guha
Das of Sengalipuram. I maintained a diary in which I used to
note down the time spent by me daily in prayer, meditation,
etc. I devoted on an average six hours a day for these practices.
Although my hymns and prayers were addressed to several
gods, Rama was the god for whom I had a natural liking and
love. I used to sit before his picture and gaze at it intently. On
such occasions I would see a halo of stars and bright lights
around his face. Sometimes I saw him smile at me. About this
time I came across a book of Swami Ram Tirtha in which
there was an article on the True Self. This appealed to me very
strongly and I read it repeatedly.\n--- 第48页 ---\n38
After about two years of this kind of sadhana, one day
before going to bed I prayed to Rama to vouchsafe His grace to
me and to uplift me spiritually. I prostrated before his picture
with extreme devotion. That night I had a dream in which I
saw some thatched sheds, trees and a hall in which a holy person
was sitting in the middle of devotees. I heard a voice telling me
to wake up and go immediately to see Sri Ramana Maharshi
who was bestowing his grace on all. This dream made such a
deep impression on me that I caught the next train to
Tiruvannamalai and arrived there the following day.
I had previously visited Tiruvannamalai on my way to
Tirupati, but I had not then heard of the Maharshi or his Ashram
and had therefore gone away after seeing the Arunachaleswara
Temple and Pavalakkunru. When, therefore, I reached the
Ashram I was surprised to see the same thatched sheds and trees
which I had seen in my dream. After taking my bath I went to
the hall and sat before Bhagavan. As I looked at him I saw
around him a halo which was exactly like the one I used to see
around Rama. During the two days of my stay I spent almost
all my time sitting before him experiencing a strange peace and
tranquillity. When I took leave of Bhagavan I implored him to
bestow his grace upon me. He nodded his head in assent.
Gradually it began to dawn upon me that it was Rama
who had directed me to Bhagavan and that Rama and Ramana
were one and the same. But when the person who had initiated
me into nama japa came to know of my visit to Sri
Ramanasramam he was displeased and warned me that I would
meet with some disaster. I, however, began to study books about
Bhagavan and went to the Ashram regularly every year during
the Jayanti and the Mahapuja, staying for two or three days.
Once I came at the time of the Deepam Festival and stayed for
seven days. On one of these days, when I was alone with
Bhagavan, I narrated my story to him and had the supreme\n--- 第49页 ---\n39
blessing of hearing from his lips that I had his grace and need
not fear any disaster or obstacle to my sadhana.
I retired from service in 1956 when I attained the age of
sixty, but continued to live at Tanjavur until 1960 when I received
a call from the Ashram President to come and help him with
the Ashram accounts in the absence of Chelliah, who had
suddenly fallen seriously ill and was not likely to resume his
duties for a long time. I looked upon this as a call from Bhagavan
and accordingly came and took charge of the Ashram accounts.
I have since then been attending to this work more or less
continuously and at the same time devoting as much time as
possible to prayer, meditation and Self-enquiry as taught by
Bhagavan. I also teach the Vedapatasala boys English, Tamil,
etc. I wish and hope to spend my remaining days doing such
service to Sri Bhagavan!
IIIII VVVVV
SSSSSaaaaannnnnttttthhhhhaaaaa RRRRRaaaaannnnngggggaaaaaccccchhhhhaaaaarrrrryyyyy
ONE OF THE great regrets of my life is the loss of a letter
which I received in 1934. It was in reply to a rather hysterical
missive I had despatched addressed ‘Personal and Private’ to Sri
Bhagavan Ramana Maharshi at Tiruvannamalai. This
communication dealt with a serious, self-admitted weakness of
mine which was my mother’s despair – a combustible temper
which would explode at the slightest provocation. It was a bad
time for me. I had just lost a father I had worshipped. I was
twelve, going on thirteen and at once all had been said.\n--- 第50页 ---\n40
I desperately needed a confidante, an adviser, somebody
preferably outside the family, and out of the blue the name of
Ramana Maharshi came to me. His was the only name I had
ever heard my father – a stubborn, intolerant sceptic – mention
without any codicils. I decided, therefore, to write to the sage
of Tiruvannamalai secretly. After a number of unsuccessful
attempts, I finally sent off a letter asking the Maharshi directly
to “please, I beg of you, help me with my temper problem.”
Within a week I received a reply signed by the Sarvadhikari,
informing me that my letter had been received and placed
before the Maharshi and that his message to me was that if I
myself made a constant and earnest effort to overcome my
temper I would rid myself of it, and that he sent me his blessings.
My first reaction to that letter was one of astonishment at
being treated like a grownup, since I had always been told what
to do, guided, instructed, warned, but never challenged except
on Sports Day. And here was this great Guru as good as telling
me: “It is your temper, isn’t it? So, you yourself deal with it.”
He had simply batted the ball back to my court in the nicest
possible way by treating me as an individual in my own right. I
rather liked that.
Ramana Maharshi entered my life again a year or so later
when my sister took our whole family on a pilgrimage. The
whole thing was going to take less than a week and we were to
stay at Tiruvannamalai only for two days. But as it turned out
we stayed at Ramanasramam for the whole week and I wept
like a lost child when we had to leave. The visit to
Ramanasramam was a shattering experience for me. I do
believe I literally fell in love with Ramana Maharshi. I was in
a daze, a trance, my tongue was gone, my mind was gone, I
was in a state of dumbfounded ecstasy. This love which had
been awakened was the kind which totally bypasses the physical
and creates an awareness of a different kind of consciousness\n--- 第51页 ---\n41
which can only be described as a mindless rapture, pure joy. It
is an unlocated, pervasive state of being sparked off by some
kind of recognition and it stays with you and you are never
the same again.
We arrived at Tiruvannamalai just before dawn. After
reaching the Ashram we bathed and had our breakfast, and then
made our way to the Hall. My mother, brother and sister went
ahead and quickly disappeared into the Hall. I hung back,
unaccountably apprehensive. Then, as I at last composed myself
and got to the door and looked in, I saw reclining on a sofa, a
golden-brown figure with the most radiant countenance I had
ever seen before or since and, as I stood there riveted to the
spot, the Maharshi turned and looked at me. When I remember
it even now, more than forty years later, tears come to my eyes
as they did then. I stood there, God knows how long, just
looking at that face. Then, as in a trance, I moved forward
deliberately towards him and touched his feet. Fighting my way
through the disapproving glances that followed, I then made
my way to a place near the window. Once I was seated I let my
tears flow. I remember I spent a good part of that morning
wiping my eyes. They were not tears of grief nor were they
tears of joy. Maybe they were for something which I saw in the
Maharshi fleetingly and which I also want and shall forever
seek. Yes, I cried for myself then and I still do it now.
Never before had I seen in a human countenance a more
intense, inward life and yet one which remained so transparent
and childlike. There was about him an irresistible and indefinable
spiritual power which simply overwhelmed me. I was conscious
of people sitting all around me but was totally incurious about
them. After an hour or so of silence I suddenly felt like singing.
Without hesitation or embarrassment, I lifted my 12 year-old
voice in a rendition of Tyagaraja’s Vinanok koni Yunnanura,
keeping time softly with my fingers on my knee. The audience\n--- 第52页 ---\n42
sat still and unresponsive. The total lack of reaction to my
performance, should in reason have embarrassed me, but I was
away in a state of mind which recognised nobody except that
reclining figure on the sofa. After a few minutes I threw myself
with another gush of abandon into Thelisi Rama Chintana. As
I began the anupallavi which exhorts the mind to stay still for a
moment and realise the true essence of the name Rama, I saw
the Maharshi turn his eyes upon me with that impersonal yet
arresting look of his, and my heart soared and I thought: “I
want to be here for ever and ever.”
For three hours every morning and every evening my vigil
in the Hall continued for seven days. After the first day my
family had, without any discussion, silently and unanimously
changed our planned programme and requested and got
extension of residence. I sat in my seat near the window still
and thought-free, just gazing at the Maharshi. Occasionally
somebody would ask a question and the Maharshi would turn
and look at him, and you got the feeling that the question had
been answered. Or somebody would ask for the meaning of a
particular phrase in a Sanskrit or Tamil stanza, and the Maharshi
would answer softly, briefly.
He was not a man of many words. His long years of
practised detachment from people made him laconic in speech.
His knowledge of classical Tamil religious literature was
considerable; he could himself compose verses and he did. His
enlightenment had not been directed by a Guru but had come
from his own Self-consciousness. It was all there lighting him
up from inside and his most effective form of communication
was intra-personal through the sense of sight and the medium
of silence. He was a very human being, who laughed and joked
occasionally, but he could suddenly plunge deep into himself
while sitting in a hall full of people and rest in that stillness of
spirit, which as he himself said, was being in God.\n--- 第53页 ---\n43
One afternoon somebody showed Maharshi some verses
written on paper. Maharshi read them, made a brief comment,
and then clarified it by narrating a story from Yoga Vasishtam. I
listened – and felt that I could understand the words that were
being spoken though I really could not have grasped their
meaning. I wondered in retrospect years later when I myself
read that book, at the delightful ease and simplicity with which
the Maharshi had narrated that story, going straight to the spirit
like an aimed arrow, and then lapsing into what I can only
describe as a speaking silence. In those eloquent silences that
punctuated his brief remarks, one seemed to feel unspoken
thought flowing around the room touching and drawing
everybody into its illuminating course. That was a strange
experience to me, that in the presence of Maharshi, speech
seemed redundant. I was totally and blissfully satisfied just being
in his presence.
That whole week we spent in the Ashram. I practically did
nothing else but sit in that Hall. We attended the Vedic recitals at
dawn of the students of the Ashram Patasala. My brother and I
watched every morning the Maharshi’s gangly walk up and down
the hill and I remember, on one memorable occasion, the gentle
sage himself smilingly stood still for a couple of minutes as he saw
my brother adjusting his camera. I had never before spent so
many days talking so little, just sitting around so much, or so lost
in a single-minded pursuit of the Maharshi. The evening we finally
left, my brother and I kept coming back to look at the Maharshi
“Just one more time” as he sat in the enclosed veranda beside the
hall having a light oil massage. I finally said: “We will go only
after he turns his head and looks at us once more.” After a minute
or two the Maharshi turned full face towards us and looked at us
and without a word we turned and walked away.
I shall not claim that my whole life was transformed after
this meeting. No. I went back to school and then to college,\n--- 第54页 ---\n44
got married, set up house, had children, started a journalistic
career of mine own. My grihasthasramam became my main
preoccupation. But my visit to Ramanasramam had done
something to me. It had left a mark on my mind and heart.
The picture of the Ashram and of the Maharshi was always in
my mind like the background curtain of a stage. Whenever I
was tired or dispirited or perplexed the wish to go to
Ramanasramam would possess me like a hunger. Even when I
was so busy that I did not know whether I was coming or going
a sudden look at a picture of the Maharshi hanging on the wall
would momentarily root me to the spot and my mind would
suddenly go blank.
I did go to Ramanasramam a fortnight before death
claimed the Maharshi’s frail human body. Because of the vast
crowds which had come to visit him, the Ashram authorities
had made special arrangements for everybody to get darshan of
the white-haired smiling figure who sat on an easy-chair on the
veranda of the room in which he later breathed his last. For a
brief moment I stood below and looked up at that benign
countenance, the eyes so bright and serene, and knew it was the
last time I was looking at the living Maharshi.
I went to the Ashram again some years later. As usual, as
soon as I passed through the Ashram gates, its peace closed around
me and emptied my mind. I sat on a veranda where I had only
to turn my head to the left to see the mountain and bring my
eyes back to the samadhi to see in my mind the Maharshi sitting
on his sofa. I sat there the whole of that day doing nothing, not
reading, not writing, not eating, not thinking, not
remembering, not wondering why it was so quiet or where
everybody was, and the voice of a young lad who came running
through the gate screaming: “Nehru has passed away” was just
an incidental sound. During all those hours I never for a
moment wanted to be anywhere else or doing anything else.\n--- 第55页 ---\n45
Whenever I feel I want to go away somewhere, away from
home, family, friends, book, mistakes, fears, sorrows, my mind
automatically turns to Ramanasramam. And my body follows.
I make the journey to Tiruvannmalai, walk into the Ashram,
enter the Hall, and I am “home” and totally at peace.
Every human being has really only one Guru like one
mother. Some are fortunate enough to meet their Gurus, some
pass them by, like ships in the night. I stumbled upon mine
when I was twelve. I now stand alone in myself. In a sense I am
twelve-going-on thirteen all over again, standing on another
threshold, remembering, waiting.
VVVVV
AAAAAnnnnnooooonnnnnyyyyymmmmmooooouuuuusssss
BHAGAVAN SRI RAMANA MAHARSHI personifies, to
many devotees, the Universal Father. Instances are many when
devotees felt that they were looking at their own father when
they saw Bhagavan.
I vividly remember a friend of our family who had
accompanied us to Sri Ramanasramam in 1942, exclaim in
delight as soon as he saw Bhagavan, “Here is my father, just as
he looked in his later life!” Far back in 1933 when my own
father was drawn to Bhagavan Ramana for the first time, he
actually saw ‘his father’, with the same physical traits. And as
recently as 1966, after the passing of my father, I cannot but be
touched by the striking resemblance between his and Bhagavan’s
appearance, although such an impression was not altogether
new to me. Indeed, Bhagavan Sri Ramana is the embodiment
of ‘Fatherhood,’ that is at once universal and transcendental.\n--- 第56页 ---\n46
On the sacred occasion of the Mahakumbabhishekam of
Sri Bhagavan’s shrine, many an illustrious pen poured forth its
spontaneous homage to his Lotus Feet. Before them, mine is
like a candle before the splendour of the sun. Nonetheless, the
inner urge to share an experience of mine, I would call it the
most sacred and valuable experience in all my life, blots out my
hesitation. It is just an insignificant parijata flower in the midst
of thousands of fragrant roses.
Experiences with Sri Bhagavan and his Grace used to be
recounted very often by my father together with other incidents
in his life, rich with spiritual lessons. A boy of about twelve then,
I used to listen avidly and as a result these narrations took a deep
root in me, ripening into an incessant desire to have Bhagavan’s
darshan, to touch him and to be always near him. During my
daily prayers, my mind used to fix itself on the frontispiece
photograph of Bhagavan Ramana, appearing in his books and
fervently ask for his darshan. As time rolled by, the yearning
intensified but no call came. Once or twice I ventured to ask my
father about it, but he used to simply brush it aside with the
remark, “If and when Bhagavan calls you, you will go.”
Then one day the first experience came. I think it was
in 1945. One night during deep sleep I dreamt that I was
sitting in the corner of a room, waiting for somebody. I
then saw Bhagavan Ramana slowly enter the room and
rushed to him and held him around the waist with both my
hands, crying and supplicating. But Bhagavan simply passed
on with apparent unconcern. I woke up and thought of it
for a long time. It seemed so disappointing that there was
no response from him. However, I felt confident since at
last I had seen him and touched him, which proved that he
had not forsaken me.
Now I began to think of him more and more. Yet again,
for a long time nothing happened.\n--- 第57页 ---\n47
Once more I was becoming desperate and losing hope.
Then one dark night, he appeared and initiated me out of his
boundless love. This time it was more of a vision than a dream.
I was half awake and felt myself rising from bed and walking
into the courtyard of our house. Total silence enveloped the
entire surroundings. The blanket of darkness was accentuated
by the twinkling stars above. I found myself standing still on a
mound of sand, facing westward, looking, looking and looking.
Slowly out of the darkness emerged the outline of a hill, shaped
exactly like the Holy Arunachala. Emerging, it steadied itself
into a discernible silhouette by remaining darker than the dark
background. After a few minutes, a small flame leapt out of the
apex of the hill. In the beginning, it was just like an eye in
vertical position, but very swiftly it grew and grew until it became
a pillar of light with extraordinary brightness, having the hilltop
as its base and origin. Its height touched the very heavens. Its
splendour was beyond description. It was just the shape of the
flame of a lamp when it burns steadily golden coloured, shining
as if a thousand suns had arisen together. Its golden rays fell on
my body. I was riveted to the spot and found that I could move
neither hand nor foot. I stood there as one totally hypnotised,
oblivious of anything else but the burning golden flame. My
mind was in raptures, throbbing with an ecstatic joy, which
seemed to burst out of my body. How long I stood like this I
cannot say, for time seemed to stop altogether. Then I became
conscious of the scene, and felt that I was not alone, in that
spot. With an effort, I turned my face to the right and found
Bhagavan Sri Ramana was standing there, looking at me. On
his lips played the most bewitching smile, while his eyes poured
out boundless compassion and love. When I saw him, I forgot
the jyoti and everything else and tried to fall at his feet. But he
gently stopped me by placing his divine hand, upon my head.
Joy of joys! My whole being, inner and outer, thrilled to that\n--- 第58页 ---\n48
divine touch from the hand of one who is no other than God.
Waves of bliss and tranquillity took possession of my whole
being. He raised his forefinger and pointed at the Golden Flame
and asked me in a voice resembling the sound of silver bells,
“Child, do you understand what the jyoti is? This is the real
Karthigai Deepam.”
Suddenly I was wide awake, ushered by consciousness into
the care and worry-ridden world. Subsequent visions have
followed, all of them showing Bhagavan as the personification
of supreme love, but none could ever match the splendour of
this first vision and initiation.
I no longer felt dissatisfied at not being able to go to the
Ashram in a physical sense, though I must confess, occasionally
the desire did arise.
In 1942, I was proceeding to Madras from Coimbatore.
The train was speeding along some hills in the night when a
prayer to be allowed to visit the Ashram took shape in me. As I
was accompanying my father, who did not entertain ideas from
children, I did not talk of the prayer to anyone. A few days
later, when we were to return to Coimbatore, my father suddenly
asked me how I would like to go to Ramanasramam and have
darshan of Sri Bhagavan. I am not ashamed to record here that
I broke into tears on hearing this, as this was a prayer so
graciously granted by Sri Bhagavan.
The next day, we were in our home — Sri Ramanasramam.
It was a Friday and a New Moon day. As I entered the divine
presence of Bhagavan Ramana, I felt that I was submerging in a
sea, only this was a sea of bliss and tranquillity.
We were there the whole of the forenoon and except for a
swift, piercing look that Sri Bhagavan blessed me with, nothing
happened. Nothing mattered any more.
When I heard later that Sri Bhagavan had shed his mortal
frame, a few teardrops rolled down my cheeks, but my father\n--- 第59页 ---\n49
sternly said, “You are a fool. Where can Bhagavan go?” Years
have rolled by; still the torch burns on, gathering more and
more brightness. It is the torch that he, out of his boundless
grace, lit in my heart. Now my children, in their turn, ask me:
“Father, when will Bhagavan Thatha come to us?” I feel too full
to reply to them, yet sometimes say, “All in good time, children.
Learn to labour and to wait.”
When the messenger comes, carrying the authority of
inexorable time may my heart surrender to him and may my
lips whisper, “Om Namo Bhagavate Sri Ramanaya.”
VVVVV IIIII
TTTTT..... RRRRR..... AAAAA..... NNNNNaaaaarrrrraaaaayyyyyaaaaannnnnaaaaa
THE YEAR WAS 1948.
I was then in my thirty-ninth year. I lived in Madras with
my wife and four children. I was the branch manager of a large
British firm, and being in happy circumstances, I did not find
the need for any religious practices or spiritual enquiries; I was
content with enjoying the good things in life.
I was on a tour of small towns, with one of the inspectors
under me, Sri Parthasarathi. It was a hot April day. As Sri
Parthasarathi and I were boarding the train at Villupuram to go
to Tiruvannamalai, we noticed a young man of about twenty-
five trying to enter the first class compartment by the next door.
The man was so fat that he heaved his bulky body this way and
that, while another man on the platform, obviously his servant,
pushed him in through the door. He was also ashamed of
the curious way the people on the platform, including\n--- 第60页 ---\n50
Sri Parthasarathi and myself, watched his predicament. He got
in somehow and occupied the cubicle next to ours.
When the train had run for some minutes, the man came
to our cabin, introduced himself as Ratilal Premchand Shah
and started talking.
Sri Ratilal was a Saurashtra Vaishya, born and brought up
in Gondal, the only son of his father, a rich merchant of the
place. He had been married six years ago. Cursed with so much
fat in his body from his tenth year, now at twenty-five, he was a
huge mass of flesh and misery. How he wished to get rid of his
fat and be a man!
In the last week of March, Sri Ratilal had a vision while he
was asleep at night. He saw an ascetic smiling and beckoning
him. The smile and the beckoning persisted for a long time and
stood clearly before Sri Ratilal’s mental eye when he awoke. He
did not speak to any one about the vision. Two days later his
wife was reading a Gujarati magazine. Looking over her
shoulders he saw the picture of the ascetic he had seen in his
vision. He came to know that the ascetic was Bhagavan Ramana
Maharshi. He at once went to his father and arranged for his
journey to Tiruvannamalai with the trusted family servant. All
he knew about Bhagavan was what that Gujarati article said.
But he felt sure that his suffering would end as soon as he reached
Bhagavan; the smile and the beckoning of his vision of Bhagavan
had given him that firm faith.
Sri Parthasarathi had seen Bhagavan many times before
and had also read a good deal about him. He and Sri Ratilal
talked about Bhagavan during the whole two-hour journey. I
was apparently reading an English novel, but heard their
conversation with interest and attention.
At Tiruvannamalai station, Sri Ratilal was received by a
local merchant with whom his father had arranged for his stay.
Sri Parthasarathi and I proceeded to the travellers bungalow.\n--- 第61页 ---\n51
It was four when we had our bath and tiffin. Sri
Parthasarathi knew that I was very businesslike and would not
waste a single minute. He said we could visit the market. He
was very surprised at my reply: “No, Parthasarathi! We shall go
and have darshan of Maharshi first. Then, if time permits, we
shall go to the temple. Let business wait!”
It was about five when Sri Parthasarathi and I entered the
Ashram. Going round Bhagavan’s Mother’s samadhi, we came
to the veranda by its side. About fifty people were sitting there,
Sri Ratilal, his host and his servant included. Bhagavan was not
on his couch as usual. The visitors talked in whispers, trying to
find out where he was.
After waiting for some ten minutes and finding that
Bhagavan had not come to his seat, Sri Parthasarathi suggested
to me that we could in the meantime go around and see the
goshala and other places.
Finishing our inspection we were returning to the veranda
by another side, when we heard a childish voice say “Chee, asatthe!
(Fie, you creature!).” We could see no children around, and,
therefore, peeped to find out the source of the voice. We
observed movement among the leaves of the brinjal, lady’s-finger
and other plants in the kitchen garden near the veranda. Looking
more intently, we saw a small goat, a little monkey and a squirrel
and Bhagavan Ramana Maharshi! Bhagavan was sitting on his
haunches with his legs folded up to his breast. The goat nestled
between his knees; the monkey had its head resting on his right
knee; the squirrel was perched on his left knee. Holding a packet
of paper in his left palm, Bhagavan picked ground nuts from it
with his right-hand fingers, one by one, and fed the goat, the
monkey and the squirrel, and himself, by turns. His remarks
appeared to have been addressed to the monkey which had tried
to snatch the nut he was going to place between the squirrel’s
lips. As we watched, the four companions went on enjoying the\n--- 第62页 ---\n52
eating. All four seemed to be equally happy; the way they looked
at one another and kept close together was touching. The goat,
the monkey, the squirrel, and Bhagavan, had obviously forgotten
their differences in species! And we too, looking on, saw all the
four only as good friends despite the differences in their forms.
No words could describe the feelings which passed through my
being at the sight. The vision of the Transcendent appeared as a
flash of lightning, and revealed to me the essence of being,
awareness and bliss, sat-chit-ananda.
The nuts were over. Bhagavan threw the paper away and
said: “Pongoda! (Go away, you fellows!),” just as any old man
speaking to his grandchildren. The goat, the monkey and the
squirrel left. Bhagavan made to get up. Sri Parthasarathi and I
hurried away, feeling guilty of trespassing into the Divine, but
not sorry.
Soon after Sri Parthasarathi and I had resumed our seats in
the veranda, Bhagavan came to his couch. I cannot say he looked
at us. He stood facing us, his eyes fixed on something far above
and beyond anything on earth. They were like screens which
shut the material world off from the light which was burning
behind them. Sparks of light shot out through the fibres of the
screen at times, sparks which cooled the eyes on which they fell,
pierced the gross coverings and lighted the wick inside them.
Bhagavan reclined on the pillows in the couch, supporting
his head on his left palm. We all sat down to look at his face.
We sat and sat, and looked and looked. No one spoke or
made any noise. But the confrontation was not a dead silence;
it was a very live experience in which the innermost being of
each one of us communed with the Supreme Consciousness
which was Bhagavan.
I was numb with the appalling realisation that the Glory
was the same that dwelt in the simplicity which a few minutes
ago I had seen eating groundnuts in the intimate company of\n--- 第63页 ---\n53
the goat, the monkey and the squirrel. My mind kept recalling
that scene: how the goat had snuggled to Bhagavan’s breast in
perfect confidence in his love for it; how the monkey had
grinned in joy and how Bhagavan had returned the grin as
both bit the nut; how the squirrel had peered with its pinhead
eyes into Bhagavan’s dream-laden ones and scratched his nose
tenderly with its tiny left paw. The vision of the Supreme Spirit
underlying and overlaying the sense perception was spiced with
the lovely sight of the groundnut party in the kitchen garden.
Bhagavan got up from the couch. We got up. It seemed
tacitly understood that we were to leave. We left. I felt a hitherto-
unknown peace and joy inside me; the faces of the others also
showed a similar condition.
I saw Sri Ratilal, his host and his servant get into their
bullock cart at the Ashram gate. There was a new spring in Sri
Ratilal’s movements. Bhagavan’s promise in the lad’s vision
appeared to be starting a fulfilment.
Many things have happened since that day in my life. My
material circumstances underwent changes for the worse, but
my inner life has always been happy since that day, for I very
often got a vision of Bhagavan, particularly when I was most
depressed in spirits.
In 1953, I was in Rajkot staying alone in a lodge. One
day, while in the dining hall, a man of about thirty accosted
me, “Don’t you recognise me, Sir?” “No, I’m sorry,” I replied,
truthfully. The man continued: “I am Ratilal of Gondal, Sir!
You remember the darshan of Bhagavan Ramana Maharshi, five
years ago?” I looked at the man again. He was thin and wiry, his
face aglow with health and happiness. I shook his hands heartily.
He spoke again: “Sir, Bhagavan fulfilled his promise wonderfully
well. You see me. I am now managing our family business, my
father taking complete rest. I have a son two years old and
expect my wife to give me another child in a month or two.”\n--- 第64页 ---\n54
My mind immediately went back to the goat, the monkey
and the squirrel – and Bhagavan Ramana Maharshi. I could
never think of Bhagavan alone!
So it has been all these years. The scene comes to my mind’s
eye often. The kitchen garden with the four friends at the
groundnut party.
And, I thank Sri Ratilal and Sri Parthasarathi for guiding
me to the Vision Beautiful!\n--- 第65页 ---\n55
IIIII CCCCC
NNNNNCCCCCIIIIIDDDDDEEEEENNNNNTTTTTSSSSS OOOOONNNNNNNNNNEEEEECCCCCTTTTTEEEEEDDDDD WWWWWIIIIITTTTTHHHHH
LLLLL SSSSS BBBBB
TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE IIIIIFFFFFEEEEE OOOOOFFFFF RRRRRIIIII HHHHHAAAAAGGGGGAAAAAVVVVVAAAAANNNNN
MMMMM..... VVVVV..... KKKKKrrrrriiiiissssshhhhhnnnnnaaaaannnnn
ON August 29, 1896, Venkataraman (later Sri Bhagavan)
left Madurai for Tiruvannamalai. One week later,
Munagala S. Venkataramiah, later known as Ramanananda
Saraswati, went home from Madurai to Sholavandan and told
his mother that a brahmin boy who was studying in Madurai at
an adjoining school had run away from home. At that time he
little realised that he was to meet this runaway boy later in 1918
at Skandasramam and that he was to become his disciple, live
in close proximity of Sri Bhagavan from 1933 to 1950, and be
the compiler of Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi.
S.V. Ramanathan and M. V. Krishnan, sons of Munagala
S. Venkataramiah came to the Ashram with their parents in the
summer of 1930. They were just thirteen and ten years of age.
One morning they were standing near the old dining hall (where
now Sri Bhagavan’s samadhi stands) when Ramu, the elder brother,
remarked that for the last few days no onion sambar had been
tasted by them. At that precise moment Sri Bhagavan was passing
by the boys, as he was returning from the kitchen. He smiled and
asked Ramu: “So, you want vengaaya (onion) sambar!” The boys
blushed and kept quiet. Next morning, the boys were served
with vengaaya sambar. Everybody thought it was onion sambar.
Sri Bhagavan later in the day asked Ramu how he relished the
sambar to which he replied: “Very well.”\n--- 第66页 ---\n56
Ramu, however, was surprised to know the truth only a
few days later when his mother told him that what he ate was
not onion but garlic sambar! There was no onion at that time
in the Ashram and yet Sri Bhagavan wanted to fulfil the boy’s
wish. Through his expert culinary knowledge, he brought the
smell and taste of onion to garlic itself!
* * *
IN THE 1930s, Dr. T. N. Krishnaswamy wanted to visit the
Ashram and be with Sri Bhagavan during the weekend. He asked
a friend to accompany him. This friend at that time did not even
put on his shirt. He was in his dhoti and upper cloth and had two
or three rupees in his purse. He readily agreed to go then and
there. Both travelled up to Katpadi by train, took a bus to Vellore
and changed onto another bus for Tiruvannamalai. In Vellore
the friend wanted to take something to Sri Bhagavan. On the
roadside he saw a woman selling kovai kai. He bought the lot for
a few annas. It was about one viss, or 1½ kg in weight. Since he
had no bag to carry the vegetable, he bundled them at one end of
his upper cloth. Both of them reached Tiruvannamalai in the
evening. The vegetable bundle was put in front of Sri Bhagavan
when both the devotees paid their respects. On an enquiry from
Sri Bhagavan, the bundle was opened. Sri Bhagavan saw the
contents and said that if kovai kai was cooked with brinjals it
would be tasty. The next morning a devotee arriving from Madras
through Villupuram brought brinjals! The curry was cooked in
the morning and all of them relished it.
* * *
IN 1937, AN elderly American came along with a group to
visit Sri Bhagavan. The trend of the discussion was that the five\n--- 第67页 ---\n57
senses were to be put under check. Since the old American was
deaf he could not follow the discussions. Sri Bhagavan remarked
that the American needed to control only four senses as the
fifth (hearing) was already under check. Someone in the Hall
explained this to the American and he beamed with joy.
* * *
WHEN SRI BHAGAVAN was in Skandashram two devotees
were having heated discussions regarding siddhis (occult
powers). One devotee did not believe in such powers while
the other was a firm believer. A challenge was accepted by the
latter, who undertook to convert a copper coin into a gold
one. It was agreed that this should be done in the presence of
Sri Bhagavan. On the appointed day the two devotees were
sitting in front of Sri Bhagavan. A copper coin was produced
and everybody examined it. It was given to the devotee who
kept it for several minutes in his closed palm and then opened
it. There was a sovereign. Sri Bhagavan with a faint smile told
him to part with the sovereign and repeat the miracle. The
challenge was not accepted!
* * *
MUNAGALA V. KRISHNAN went to Delhi in December,
1940, in search of a job. He could not secure a job up to the
end of February, 1941. So he wrote to his father Sri
Venkataramiah saying that he had to return to the south as no
job was available. This letter was shown to Sri Bhagavan who
went through it and said: “Let him stay on in Delhi.” In March
he got a job. From then V. Krishnan prospered very well.
* * *\n--- 第68页 ---\n58
SRI BHAGAVAN COULD very well probe deep into the minds
of devotees and visitors. He said the following about a
sannyasi-devotee who used to sit daily before Sri Bhagavan for
three or four hours in meditation: “Aspirants who sat motionless
even for longer times have been deceived,” meaning thereby
that he lacked concentration or humility or both.
Sri Bhagavan said the following to Sri Salem Rajagopala
Iyer about a devotee: “He has some eye defect. When he keeps
his eyes open tears fall down. Others mistake this for deep
bhakti.” This devotee used to visit people in various towns and
demonstrate the tears flowing from his eyes.
* * *
SRI RAMANATHA DIKSHITAR, a pupil in a Vedapatasala,
was a puny figure, about four feet and six inches in height. He
used to spin cotton yarn, get it woven and present the cloth to
Sri Bhagavan for his loin cloth. This Ramanatha Dikshitar was
also a freedom-fighter and a follower of Mahatma Gandhi. Once
he wanted to go to Vedaranyam to take part in the salt satyagraha.
Sri Bhagavan jocularly remarked that the police would be afraid
of him. When Ramanatha Dikshitar went and joined the salt
satyagraha, he was not arrested, the police just ignored him.
Ramanatha Dikshitar, who was short and frail, seldom
spoke to others and when he did he was full of humility.
There was another devotee who was well built and tall. This
devotee once got angry with Ramanatha Dikshitar, and raised
himself to his full height and thundered, “Do you know who
I am?”
Dikshitar meekly replied that it was the very purpose for
which every devotee was in the Ashram.
* * *\n--- 第69页 ---\n59
AFTER SRI BHAGAVAN moved down and settled near the
Mother’s samadhi there was only a thatched roof over the
samadhi and an adjoining hut. Some devotees decided to build
a more solid hall. So bricks and building material were gathered.
The bricks were carried to the site by the devotees. Sri Bhagavan
also wanted to work but the devotees would not permit him.
One moonlit night, when all were asleep, a devotee woke up
and found that Sri Bhagavan was missing. He woke up the
others and they all began to search for him. They found Sri
Bhagavan taking part in bringing bricks to the site from a kiln
opposite the Ashram.
* * *
IN THE EARLY 1920s there was a big mango tree near
Palitirtham. Chinna Swami was also in the Ashram, although
he had not yet taken charge of the management. Dandapani
Swami, a huge figure, was another Ashram inmate. Chinna
Swami and Dandapani Swami did not like each other. One
night Dandapani Swami wanted to settle scores with Chinna
Swami, so he seized Chinna Swami to crush him. Bhagavan
appeared on the scene and slapped the back of Dandapani
Swami, who immediately put Chinna Swami down. No words
were spoken and each retired to his place of rest. Later
Dandapani Swami described the slap as ‘terrific’.\n--- 第70页 ---\n60
LLLLL
EEEEESSSSSSSSSSOOOOONNNNNSSSSS FFFFFRRRRROOOOOMMMMM
BBBBB ’’’’’ LLLLL
HHHHHAAAAAGGGGGAAAAAVVVVVAAAAANNNNN SSSSS IIIIIFFFFFEEEEE
KKKKK..... RRRRR..... KKKKK..... MMMMMuuuuurrrrrttttthhhhhyyyyy
OUR Bhagavan was an adept in the art of cooking. He
used to cut vegetables, grind pulses and freely take part in
various kinds of preparations. In the utilisation of different parts
of a vegetable or fruit, his suggestions were very valuable and
worth noting. He was very economical and knew how to put
to use anything that came his way.
Once when there was a discussion about the foodstuffs
such as onions, drumsticks, carrots, etc., which the orthodox
people avoid, Sri Bhagavan remarked that they may do good to
the body, but not to the mind. They may purify the blood and
benefit the body, but they rouse passions and are not helpful
for the purification of the mind (manassudhi).
Giving up for life certain fruits, nuts or other foodstuffs
dear to one, during the pilgrimages to holy places, is one of the
practices prevalent among the religious people. One day Sri
Bhagavan noticed a devotee avoiding a mango on this ground
and commented that a better form of tyaga (renunciation) would
be to accept whatever one happens to get and not to crave for
that which is not available.
Once Sri Bhagavan expressed that one may avoid things
which do not agree with one’s constitution and take necessary
quantities of suitable ones that do him good. But maintenance\n--- 第71页 ---\n61
of body and health should not occupy much attention as it is
not our chief pursuit.
Sri Bhagavan never used to compromise with equality in
serving meals. He never agreed to accept anything which is not
equally shared by his fellow diners. He was satisfied only when
he was served in the end after everyone was served. He liked
that he should be given only smaller quantities of even the most
delicious or costly dishes than others. Even under exceptional
circumstances he was not willing to take the food of superior
quality unless it was distributed to all. This was one of the
principles he observed very rigorously.
Sri Bhagavan made people of different tongues in South
India quite at home by speaking or writing in their respective
languages. It requires a great effort to cross the narrow linguistic
barriers and shed the unjustifiable prejudices against sister
languages and appreciate good works in them. Only one who
studies one or two languages in addition to his mother tongue
and moves and lives with others has ample opportunities of
broadening his outlook and also of reaching others’ hearts. The
initial linguistic affinities do not last long and after all, people
of the same mentality flock together, whatever their mother
tongue is. Sri Bhagavan is particularly adored as he had taken a
lot of pains to master several languages and write his works in
the same for the benefit of devotees from various parts. His
glorious example will continue to influence generations of
devotees to put forth their best efforts in this direction and to
come closer by understanding one another better.\n--- 第72页 ---\n62
LLLLL DDDDD
OOOOOVVVVVIIIIINNNNNGGGGG EEEEEVVVVVOOOOOTTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
TTTTT..... PPPPP..... RRRRR.....
AN old devotee vividly relates how Major Chadwick once
resorted to a stratagem to induce Sri Bhagavan to improve
his health by taking a medicine.
It was some time during the early forties. Sri Bhagavan
showed symptoms of slight jaundice and was growing weaker
and weaker every day avoiding medication. Devotees implored
him to have some treatment but without success. Some of us
prayed and a few others were silently doing circumambulation
round the Hall in which Sri Bhagavan was seated. Major
Chadwick was prominent among those beseeching Sri Bhagavan
to take some medicine.
One day while I was just starting from home to my office
in Madras, the postman handed me a letter. It was from Mr.
Chadwick. The letter I recollect read like this: “Dear T. P. R. I
am sorry to tell you of the declining health of Sri Bhagavan
who is growing weaker day by day, and will do nothing to
alleviate it. He will not take any medicines, or heed our requests
and persuasions. It is misery to be seeing this. Today just a
thought came to me. You know that Sri Bhagavan always avoids
medicines, but all the same he does not reject ayurvedic
preparations like ‘black halwa’ (lehiyam) which if offered he
may be pleased to accept. So why don’t you go to some ayurvedic
expert or pharmacy and ask for something, mentioning the
symptoms and conditions and send it to him (to the Ashram).
If it is your good karma he may be pleased to take it. But don’t\n--- 第73页 ---\n63
say I wrote to you or expressed concern. You can say that by
chance you met so and so and found a lehiyam well prepared
which is good for many things and that it is only a tonic and
not a medicine, etc. I shall expect your immediate response.”
On reading this letter, I went straight to the Venkataramana
Dispensary in Mylapore before going to court, and meeting
the senior physician in charge there narrated the symptoms
without disclosing the identity of the person for whom it was
meant. I requested him to prescribe and give something helpful.
The doctor asked me if I could not bring the patient for
examination. I expressed my inability to do that and merely
gave the age and other details. He then wrote two items with
instructions to follow. The first was an ‘oil’ and the second was
a lehiyam, called jiragavilvadi lehiyam and he advised me how
to use them. I knew Sri Bhagavan was not usually given to
consuming any ‘oils’ internally and so left it out and purchased
one pound of the lehiyam and went to my office. Retaining a
small part with me, I packed the rest and sent it to Sri
Niranjananandaswami, the then sarvadhikari, with a letter
saying: “Dear Sri Chinnaswamigal, Today as I was passing
through Mylapore I peeped into the Venkataramana Dispensary
where a fresh lehiyam was being prepared and ready for sale,
called Jiragavilvadi lehiyam. I felt impelled to buy it and did so.
It is so sweet and good that retaining a portion for me, I have
sent the rest to you which I request you may place before Sri
Bhagavan as any other offering is done. This is not medicine
but belongs to the class of tonics generally taken by all.” Sri
Chinnaswami accordingly appears to have placed both the parcel
and the letter before Sri Bhagavan.
That weekend, as was usual then with me, I left for
Tiruvannamalai. On arrival at the Ashram and in Sri Bhagavan’s
Hall as I rose up after obeisance Sri Bhagavan turned to me on
his couch with a small container in hand and remarked, “See!\n--- 第74页 ---\n64
This is the lehiyam you have sent. I am using it regularly four
times. Jeeraga and Bilva are very good for biliousness,” and all
that. I felt elated and happy at the success of Mr. Chadwick’s
scheme and sat down before Sri Bhagavan. Within half a minute
Sri Bhagavan asked, “What? Did anyone write to you to send
this?” I immediately admitted it and said: “Yes Bhagavan,
Chadwick wrote to me all that I have said in my letter, and my
expectations and hope also being the same, I did what he asked
me to do and faithfully wrote to Chinnaswamigal without even
mentioning his letter as if all this was my own initiative.” Sri
Bhagavan laughed graciously saying, “See that, see that!”
That evening Chadwick entered the hall at 4 p.m. as was
his routine, inwardly also elated and happy. But hardly did he
rise from his obeisance when Sri Bhagavan said: “Chadwick!
Did you write anything?” This was a moment of shock and
surprise for Chadwick and he having done all this out of his
extreme love and devotion to Sri Bhagavan, happily declared:
“Yes Bhagavan, I wrote all that to T. P. R. What can we do? Sri
Bhagavan never will take anything and it was miserable for us
devotees to be witnessing Sri Bhagavan growing weaker day by
day. So I did all that and I am happy now.”
He resumed his seat and began to meditate as usual. Such
was Chadwick’s devotion and love to Sri Bhagavan! He was
one among the many old devotees whose devotion to him
was boundless.\n--- 第75页 ---\n65
MMMMMEEEEEMMMMMOOOOORRRRRAAAAABBBBBLLLLLEEEEE DDDDDAAAAAYYYYYSSSSS WWWWWIIIIITTTTTHHHHH
TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE SSSSSAAAAAGGGGGEEEEE OOOOOFFFFF AAAAARRRRRUUUUUNNNNNAAAAACCCCCHHHHHAAAAALLLLLAAAAA
IIIII
SSSSSwwwwwaaaaammmmmiiiii DDDDDeeeeesssssiiiiikkkkkaaaaannnnnaaaaannnnndddddaaaaa
THE highest ideal for man is to realise God, his real Self.
Three prerequisites for fulfilling this sublime purpose of
life are: a human body as it is only in such a state that we can
work out our destiny and practise sadhana, the desire to be free
and the help of a Guru who has crossed the ocean of delusion.
This objective unfolds itself commensurate with our spiritual
effort and growth.
It was Grace and good fortune that brought me to the
presence of Bhagavan Sri Ramana in 1927. On entering the
Ashram I saw the Maharshi seated on a couch wearing nothing
more than a loincloth and appearing to gaze at some distant
void. He was surrounded by devotees sitting at his feet and the
whole scene was reminiscent of sages of yore. I stood for a while
in his presence. He looked at me casually and I made my
namaskarams. He made kind enquiries as to where I came from
and about my stay. Next morning I went to the Ashram and sat
before the Maharshi in meditation. The mind was quiet and
not wavering. Sri Maharshi was sitting on the couch as usual,
apparently gazing at the Hill.
Next morning I again returned to the Ashram to sit at his
feet as I found I could easily concentrate in his presence and\n--- 第76页 ---\n66
have progressively longer spells of undisturbed meditation such
as I have never been able to achieve before anywhere else. When
I told the Maharshi about it and how enjoyable it was, he asked
me whether I was sleeping at the time of meditation. On my
replying in the negative he laughed and enquired about my
method of meditating, which was to concentrate on a light in
the heart and offer a flower to my Ishtam (chosen God)
whenever the mind wavered as instructed by Swami Sivanandaji
Maharaj, second president of Ramakrishna Math Mission. The
Maharshi said it was all right for me and I could continue in
this way.
The third day after a lengthy meditation in front of the
Maharshi I told him about a picture of Jesus I had seen in a
church, surrounded by all sorts of animals at peace with one
another. He replied that this was due to the fact of animosity
having been conquered by the sage. Even snakes would not
harm anybody here in this Ashram and added that in the presence
of sages evil natures would be conquered and friendliness prevail.
That is how the rishis of old used to live in forests and caves
unharmed by wild creatures.
A visitor asked the Maharshi in the evening if he saw any
form of God in meditation. He replied smiling that the Self or
Atman is our real nature and has no form. He quoted a verse of
Sankaracharya: “You are not the body, you are not the mind,
senses or buddhi. You are beyond all these. You are the Atman.”
When one becomes perfected in meditation having discarded
all desires and merges in the Self the mind loses itself without
any objectivity. The mind then is no mind. The mind losing
itself in Atman is what is called samadhi. This is the real nature
of man and sublime happiness.
The highest goal of man is to enquire ‘Who am I?’ and
realize the Self. If a human being does not try to realize this he
lives in vain. This state in which he enjoys the highest peace and\n--- 第77页 ---\n67
happiness is dearer than anything else in the world. It is in all
beings in the innermost heart. Unless one realizes this state one
will have to be born and die again and again. In this real state
one goes beyond grief and sorrow. It makes a man immortal.
Young as I was, I found it difficult to follow this teaching
and asked for clarification when I returned to the Ashram the
next morning. This was the first time I addressed the Maharshi
as ‘Bhagavan’. He replied that the path was indeed difficult, as
difficult as walking on a razor’s edge, but sincere effort is sure
to bring result. “You (meaning me) could meditate for two or
three hours not because of this life’s practice but as a result of
effort in past lives.”
The fifth day of my visit I saw a young woman with a
small baby seated at Bhagavan’s feet sobbing bitterly. She had
recently lost her husband and was grief-stricken. Bhagavan
looked at her with compassion and told her: “Husband, wife
and children are for the body. Go home and know who you
are. Go home and do not weep.” The words of a jnani have
power to transform. ‘Home’ can also mean spiritual home, the
source. His command “Go home and know who you are” might
have taken effect in a heart one-pointed and purified by sorrow.
In the case of another young woman, Echammal, heartbroken
at the loss of her entire family, Bhagavan’s very Silence was
enough to effect the transformation and lift her grief (as recorded
in Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self Knowledge).
The remaining days went off as usual. Bhagavan’s routine
was to sit on the couch mostly in silence till noon and again
after food and a little rest. He used to look through the mail
twice a day and go for a short walk on the Hill. He said on one
occasion that since there was no mind at all, there was also no
concept of anything. All was one full expanse in peace and
happiness. He quickly added that we cannot even say one
expanse as there was no second. He was immersed in\n--- 第78页 ---\n68
sat-chit-ananda (Existence-Consciousness-Bliss). Now his nature
was that always.
When I was ready to leave I told Bhagavan so on the ninth
day of my stay. Kneeling before him I wept profusely. He
remarked: “You can stay on. Nobody asked you to go.” However,
I took leave of him the next day and he told me to continue my
meditation as usual and that everything will be all right in the
course of time.
By Bhagavan’s Grace not only was I drawn into the fold
of a sage who had the highest realization but was helped in
every way to experience periods of supreme peace and bliss.
This indeed forms the sheet anchor of my life that was, that is
and that will be. The silent ministration of Bhagavan will indeed
remain an eternal spring of spiritual joy and peace.
It is but appropriate that I close this account with salutations
to Bhagavan Ramana who keeps on inspiring ever increasing
numbers of seekers as time goes on.
How gracious art Thou Lord Dakshinamurthy,
To have blessed mankind by Thy ministration
in human form,
To Bhagavan who is but the form of Satyam,
Sivam and Sundaram,
Do I offer my salutations again and again.
IIIII IIIII
SSSSSaaaaannnnntttttiiiii
I BELIEVE THAT September 15th, 1943 is an important day
in my life, since it was on that memorable day that I was\n--- 第79页 ---\n69
introduced to one of the greatest living sages of modern India.
It is not every day that one meets a sage like Sri Bhagavan. I
think the opportunity that arose of coming into contact with
him must have been the result of my prayers to God to lead me
to a living sage.
On September 15th, at 7 a.m. I reached the Ashram.
Bhagavan had gone to the big dining hall for breakfast. The
devotees accompanied him and they were taking their seats one
by one. From an old devotee of Bhagavan, I had a letter to Sri
Niranjanananda Swami. I delivered the letter to him, and he
took me to the dining hall and introduced me to Bhagavan.
Bhagavan welcomed me with a soft and affectionate look. I
prostrated and when I got up he made a sign to take my seat
nearby and I did so. From the moment Bhagavan’s eyes fell on
me, my heart went out to him in spontaneous love and
reverence. The way he ate his food, the way he sat, the way he
walked, the way he talked, were so remarkably calm, and so
different from the manner of ordinary men. Here, I thought,
is a perfect example of a sage, a jivanmukta. It was only now
that I understood the significance of Arjuna’s question to the
Lord, regarding the sthitaprajna. These questions are important
because the sage sits, talks and walks, not like ordinary men,
but whatever he does has a peculiarity of its own. To understand
this one has to see a sage for oneself and sit at his feet.
At about 9 a.m. Bhagavan came to the meditation hall
and we too entered the hall and sat facing him, while he reclined
on his couch with his face turned towards us. As I sat in the
meditation hall the words of king Dushyanta, ‘Peace dwells in
an ashram’ came to my mind and I felt that they were true of
this ashram also. For the first time in my life, I realized how
dynamic santi could be. Peace seemed to emerge from Bhagavan
and fill the hearts of one and all. In his presence, the mind
became calm and tranquil of its own accord and consequently\n--- 第80页 ---\n70
doubts and questions became few, and finally vanished. I was
very happy and felt myself spontaneously as a kritakritya that
my heart softly whispered within me the words, “Dhanyoham,
Dhanyoham” (I am blessed).
All the devotees sat in the hall in front of Bhagavan till
about noon, and at 12 o’clock a bell was rung announcing lunch.
Bhagavan got up from his seat, and with his stick in hand slowly
moved out of the meditation hall and proceeded to the dining
hall. There food was served and we waited till Bhagavan took his
first morsel of rice. We followed, and in about half an hour we
finished our lunch and Bhagavan went back to the meditation
hall. We were expected to take rest for 2 or 3 hours. By about 4
o’clock, people came into the meditation hall and sat before
Bhagavan, some to put themselves in tune with the atmosphere
of tranquillity, some to meditate, some to ask questions and get
their doubts cleared, and some to hear the conversation that took
place between Bhagavan and the many visitors. To listen to these
conversations was a lesson in itself. Bhagavan’s physical form has
gone, but we his devotees who have sat in his presence and have
heard his calm and profound words, carry in our hearts indelible
impressions of him and his words which passing times and
circumstances could not easily efface. To all of us, these memories
are precious treasures, and I think we should feel grateful to the
ashram for publishing these volumes which aid us to relive those
days we have spent with Bhagavan.
I shall now relate an incident which to me was very
significant. Two or three days after my arrival at the ashram, I
had a desire to dedicate a Sanskrit stanza to Bhagavan, but my
knowledge of that language was not so much as to compose
verse with any degree of confidence. However, the desire had
sprung up within me and I was sure that by God’s kripa even
the dumb could be made eloquent. So, I thought, if I prayed to
Bhagavan, he would satisfy my desire. Hence in my heart, I