\n--- 第1页 ---\nTimeless Time
in
Sri Ramana
Maharshi
Foreword by
Eliot Deutsch
A.R. Natarajan
Timeless
in
Time
A.R.Natarajan
World
Wisdom
Hinduism/Spirituality
Sri
Ramana
Maharshi
This Illustrated edItIon features:
• autobiographical statements of Sri Ramana Maharshi;
• the essential teachings of the Maharshi, in his own words;
• biographical text from A.R. Natarajan, gathered from direct sources;
• a foreword by Eliot Deutsch, a leading authority on Hindu thought;
• 160 photographs, some published for the first time;
• a glossary of Hindu terms;
• detailed notes, references, and a bibliography.
srI ramana maharshI (1879-1950) was probably the most famous Hindu sage
of the twentieth century. He was renowned for the simple approach he took in
leading people to spiritual realization, and for the powerful peace-giving pres-
ence that people from all religions experienced upon meeting him. Timeless in
Time is the story of his own remarkable spiritual life, along with the essence of
his teachings. The many photos of the sage, and of the people and places impor-
tant in his life, enhance our understanding of the words of the text with a sense of
the Maharshi’s unique presence.
“The heritage of India is enriched with numberless saints and yogis. Ramana Maharshi represents that tradition
and his spiritual greatness is guiding millions of people. Such masters light the path and bring solace to suffer-
ing humanity.”
—His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama
“He bore himself with naturalness and at the same time with dignity. His mien was cheerful, smiling, polite.
His eyes with a gentle benignity rested on my face. His body was absolutely still. He smiled and said, ‘Silence
is also conversation.’”
—W. Somerset Maugham, playwright and novelist, on meeting Sri Ramana Maharshi (Maugham
would later use the Maharshi as the model for the holy man in the novel The Razor’s Edge)
“The Maharshi,… looking intently for a few minutes into Ramdas’ eyes as though he was pouring into Ramdas
his blessings through those orbs, nodded his head to say he had blessed. A thrill of inexpressible joy coursed
through Ramdas’ frame.”
—Swami Ramdas, renowned Hindu sage, on experiencing the presence of Sri Ramana Maharshi
“Sri Ramana Maharshi … taught no formal doctrine, but with the piercing question ‘Who am I’ drove his
disciples to the Self.”
—Heinrich Zimmer, from his book Philosophies of India
“He proved in his person that a consciousness transcending both the physical and mental plane was compatible
with full use of the physical and mental faculties.… He belonged to the true line of India’s spiritual teachers.”
—The Times Literary Supplement
ISBN-13: 978-1-933316-15-4
World Wisdom ISBN-10: 1-933316-15-2
$21.95 US / $27.95 CAN\n--- 第2页 ---\nWorld Wisdom
The Library of Perennial Philosophy
The Library of Perennial Philosophy is dedicated to the exposition of the
timeless Truth underlying the diverse religions. This Truth, often referred to as
the Sophia Perennis—or Perennial Wisdom—finds its expression in the revealed
Scriptures as well as the writings of the great sages and the artistic creations of
the traditional worlds.
The Perennial Philosophy provides the intellectual principles capable of ex-
plaining both the formal contradictions and the transcendent unity of the great
religions.
Ranging from the writings of the great sages of the past, to the perennialist
authors of our time, each series of our Library has a different focus. As a whole,
they express the inner unanimity, transforming radiance, and irreplaceable val-
ues of the great spiritual traditions.
Timeless in Time: Sri Ramana Maharshi appears as one of our selections in
the Spiritual Masters: East & West series.

Spiritual Masters: East & West Series
This series presents the writings of great spiritual masters of the past and
present from both East and West. Carefully selected essential writings of these
sages are combined with biographical information, glossaries of technical terms,
historical maps, and pictorial and photographic art in order to communicate a
sense of their respective spiritual climates.\n--- 第4页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Sri Ramana Maharshi
A.R. Natarajan
Foreword by
Eliot Deutsch
World Wisdom\n--- 第5页 ---\nTimeless in Time: Sri Ramana Maharshi
The text and Introduction to the 2002 edition of Timeless in Time published by arrangement with
V.S. Ramanan, President, Board of Trustess, Sri Ramanasramam, Tiruvannamalai 606 603.
© Sri Ramanasramam. All rights reserved.
Publisher’s Preface, Foreword, Glossary of Timeless in Time
© 2006 World Wisdom, Inc.
All photographs © Sri Ramanasramam, except photographs on pages 9, 10, 17, 32,
80-81, 121, 122 © Michael Oren Fitzgerald
No part of this book may be used or reproduced
in any manner without written permission,
except in critical articles and reviews.
On the Cover: Sri Ramana Maharshi and Arunachala
Book design by Susana Marín
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Natarajan, A. R.
Timeless in time : Sri Ramana Maharshi / by A.R. Natarajan ; foreword by Eliot Deutsch.
p. cm. -- (The library of perennial philosophy) (Spiritual masters. East & West series)
Previously published: Bangalore : Ramana Maharshi Centre for Learning, 1999.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN-13: 978-1-933316-15-4 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-933316-15-2 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Ramana, Maharshi. 2. Gurus--India--Biography. I.
Title. II. Series. III. Series: Spiritual masters. East and West series.
BL1175.R342N37 2006
294.5092--dc22
2005031951
World Wisdom would like to thank V.S. Ramanan and the Sri Ramanasramam
for their assistance in making this book possible.
Printed on acid-free paper in China.
For information address World Wisdom, Inc.
P.O. Box 2682, Bloomington, Indiana 47402-2682
www.worldwisdom.com\n--- 第6页 ---\nContents
Publisher’s Preface vii
Foreword by Eliot Deutsch ix
Introduction by A.R. Natarajan xi
Section I: Who are you Ramana? 1
Who are you Ramana? 1
Tiruchuzhial—Birth Place of Sri Ramana 3
Blissful Parents 5
Born With a Purpose 6
Early Years 8
Dindigal—Self-Enquiry Begins 9
Madurai 10
The Day Before 11
Enlightenment—July 17, 1896 12
The Father’s Command 14
Advent at Arunachala 16
Section II: Penance 21
The Penance 21
Gurumurtam 23
Arunagirinathar Temple—Pachaiamman Koil 26
Section III: Virupaksha Years 29
Virupaksha Years, 1899-1916 29
Hornets 29
Composition of the Five Hymns 30
Ramana With Children 30
Some Other Incidents 31
The Most Significant Event After Enlightenment 34
Arunachala 36
The Ancient Legends 36
Sage Gautama—Skanda Purana 36
Ramana’s Guru 39
Giripradakshina 41
Gambhiram Seshier 46
Sivaprakasam Pillai 48
Vasishta Ganapati Muni 50
Truth Revealed 51
Let the Whole World Know Him as Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi 54
Ramana Gita—1917 54
Cast Your Burden on the Lord of the Universe 57
Ulladu Narpadu—Sat Darsanam 58
The Muni and the Maharshi—The Late Years 58
F.H. Humphreys 59
Lesser Known Devotees of Ramana 60
Ramana Dasa Sadananda (Seshagiri Iyer) 60
Mastan 61
Sacred Hands 61\n--- 第7页 ---\nRamana’s Mother Azhagammal 64
Mother’s Anguish 64
Ramana and Mother at Virupaksha and Skandasramam 67
Mother’s Liberation 70
Mother’s Samadhi and the Matrubhuteswara Temple 73
Section IV: Skandasramam Years 77
Skandasramam Years: 1916-1922 77
Sadhu Natanananda 79
Section V: Sri Ramanasramam Years 83
The Liberty Hall 83
Robbers Worship Ramana 85
Ramana in the Kitchen 87
Equality in the Dining Hall 89
Kinder You Are Than One’s Own Mother 91
Identification With the Poor, Humble, and Meek 93
One Consciousness 96
Monkeys 96
Squirrels 98
Peacocks 98
Wild Animals 100
Snakes 101
Liberation of Cow Lakshmi 101
Some Western Devotees 104
Paul Brunton 104
M.A. Pigot 107
Mercedes de Acosta 108
Uma Devi 109
Arthur Osborne 110
The Thirties and Forties 111
Vicarious Penance 112
Devotees Panic—Ramana’s Response 114
Did Ramana Suffer? His Attitude to Darsan 116
Mahanirvana 117
Samadhi Function and Significance of Samadhi 118
Section VI: Timeless in Time 121
The Post-Nirvana Scene 121
Absence 121
The Continuing Story 121
Teachings 123
Sadguru 128
Ramana’s Daily Miracles 134
Timeless in Time 135
Notes and References 142
Bibliography 145
Glossary 146
Biographical Notes 147\n--- 第8页 ---\nPenance
Publisher’s Preface
Timeless in Time, a biography of the great Hindu events in his life, events which are fittingly comple-
sage of world-renown, Bhagavan Sri Ramana mented by Ramanasramam’s collection of the most
Maharshi, was written by A.R. Natarajan, the essential photographs of the Maharshi, as well as
President of the Ramana Maharshi Center for the people and places associated with him. Read-
Learning, Bangalore, and has the official autho- ers will also find a select choice of question-and-
rization of Ramanasramam, the hermitage where answer sessions wherein Sri Ramana expounds his
Sri Ramana lived for many years. Vedantic teaching in its most essential manner,
The new World Wisdom edition of Timeless continually drawing the questioner back to his key
in Time is the first to appear outside of India. It question of spiritual introspection: “Who am I?”
is not, however, a mere reprinting of the Indian What can the West learn from the life and
edition, for it contains an extensive collection of teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi?
additional photographs; includes a new Foreword What has Timeless in Time to teach it? To quote the
by Eliot Deutsch, eminent scholar, professor, and incisive words of Frithjof Schuon: “Sri Ramana was
author of The Essential Vedanta: A New Source as it were the incarnation, in these latter days and
Book of Advaita Vedanta; reproduces Sri Ramana’s in the face of the modern activist fever, of what is
words in italics and in a distinctive red font; and primordial and incorruptible in India. He mani-
is brought out as a full-color illustrated edition fested the nobility of contemplative ‘non-action’ in
(where the Indian version was only in black-and- the face of an ethic of utilitarian agitation, and he
white). But in order to produce this new full-color showed the implacable beauty of pure truth in the
version with a manageable page count, it was nec- face of passions, weaknesses, and betrayals. The
essary to reduce the number of pages by editing great question ‘Who am I?’ appears, with him, as a
out some of the less significant biographical de- concrete expression of a reality that is ‘lived,’ if one
tails of Sri Ramana’s life (mostly about individu- may so put it, and this authenticity gives to each
als associated with him at the asram); it was also word of the sage a flavor of inimitable freshness—
necessary to present the copious bibliographical the flavor of Truth when it is embodied in the most
references in an abbreviated form. immediate way. The whole Vedanta is contained in
Timeless in Time draws on a wealth of sources the Maharshi’s question ‘Who am I?’ The answer is:
not available to earlier biographers of Sri Ramana, the Inexpressible.”1
but also includes extensive excerpts from these
same biographies. Readers will find that Time- WORLD WISDOM
less in Time contains a fascinating selection of Sri October 2005
Ramana’s autobiographical reminiscences of key
vii\n--- 第9页 ---\nTimeless in Time
viii\n--- 第10页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
Foreword
Timeless in Time, a biography by A.R. Natarajan of the terms of his own state of realized consciousness of the
remarkable life and teachings of Ramana Maharshi undifferentiated oneness of being. He is said to have
(1879-1950), is a beautifully written and illustrated work become enlightened when he was only sixteen years old.
which offers a vivid account of the person “Ramana”
Who can understand the state of the one
(as the author prefers to refer to him) and a choice
Who has dissolved his ego and
selection from his sayings and writings. It also includes
Is abiding always in the Self?
numerous excerpts of talks with Ramana and his Indian
For him the Self alone is.
disciples and devotees, among them Gambhiram Seshier,
What remains for him to do?
Sivaprakasam Pillai, and Vasishta Ganapati Muni, and
also Western admirers such as Paul Brunton and Arthur Living the life of a modern-day sadhu, Ramana spent
Osborne, including interviews with them regarding their long periods of time dwelling in silence. His world may
relations with him. be summed up in his own words:
Ramana was not a learned pundit or an accomplished
Can there be space, can there be time, except for me?
academic philosopher; he was rather a living exemplar
Space and time bind me, only if I am the body.
and embodiment of the deep spirituality and wisdom of
I am nowhere, I am timeless,
the Advaita, or non-dualist, Vedantic tradition which has
I exist everywhere and always.
extended from the early Vedic writings, primarily the
Upanisads, to the present. From early childhood, Ramana
ELIOT DEUTSCH
seemed obsessed with the central Advaitic question
“Who am I”? and was able to answer it, as it were, in
ix\n--- 第11页 ---\nTimeless in Time
x\n--- 第12页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
Introduction
B.V. Narasimha Swami examined several devotees and fresh perspectives as there is a growing awareness of the
took depositions from them about their relationship with power of Ramana’s presence. One is able to relate more
Ramana to ensure authenticity. Above all he had several directly to him. Readers in the new millennium need to
interviews with Ramana, the most important of which savor and enjoy the sweetness of the fresh discoveries
was his enlightenment. He stayed in a cave adjacent to and new material which has unfolded since then. But
the asram in order to be present during many of the where is the need to justify? The sweetness of his life itself
question and answer sessions which Ramana had with is enough reason. It draws one irresistibly to him. For,
devotees. It was after sustained research extending over “once the Maharshi’s story is heard or read, who would
two years that he wrote his biography of Ramana, Self- care to listen to or read any other?”1
Realization, which was published in 1931. Its appeal is The story of Sri Rama was written by Valmiki,
undimmed nearly seventy years later. In 1954, Arthur Mahabharata by Sage Veda Vyasa, and Bhagavatam on Sri
Osborne wrote his biography, Ramana Maharshi and the Krishna, by Suka Brahmam. They were all jnanis. Dante
Path of Self-Knowledge. His basic data was drawn from wrote his Divine Comedy and Milton Paradise Lost and
the earlier biography. He himself says so. But what makes Paradise Regained. Both were immersed in their devo-
his book fascinating is his style of writing, his acceptance tion to Jesus Christ. One wishes that there was someone
of Ramana as his guru, and the account of the three of their stature to write a biography of Ramana, whose
years spent in Ramana’s physical presence. Many have story is of epic proportions, at this juncture when there is
been drawn to Ramana and are still being drawn by this so much of material available.
powerful presentation. This book is one of a trilogy planned as a homage to
T.S. Ananthamurthy has written a very appealing Bhagavan Ramana on the occasion of his centenary of
biography in 1972, Life and Teachings of Sri Ramana enlightenment. The first of these, Radiance of the Self, with
Maharshi. In 1974, Professor K. Swaminathan wrote a over 170 photographs, including some from the archival
biography-cum-teachings book, Ramana Maharshi. The films, was published last year. This sacred biography is
biography portion is only fifty-four pages. Therefore, the second one. The third book, Arunachala—From
though the book has a special fragrance, written as it Rgveda to Ramana Maharshi is expected to be ready by
is by one soaked in Ramana, its coverage was limited the middle of next year.2
due to space constraints. The same holds good for Many refer to Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi as
T.M.P. Mahadevan’s Ramana Maharshi. This biography, “Bhagavan,” some others refer to him as “Maharshi.” I
published in 1977, is scholarly but short being only have preferred to use the word Ramana throughout for
seventy-seven pages. The rest of the book is devoted to it casts a magic spell beyond the reach of words and the
the teachings. In 1980, Ramana’s birth centenary year, mind.
Joan Greenblatt and Mathew Greenblatt wrote their Though my heart does not melt with love for
pictorial biography, Bhagavan Sri Ramana. The design Ramana, as a candle near fire would, often he makes me
and presentation, backed by their love and reverence for a captive of his love. I can feel strongly his boundless
Ramana, have made this book very attractive. grace at work as this biography is being written, as each
To all these earlier biographers, each great in their event falls in place in the proper perspective. Is he not
own way, I offer my humble salutations. the master of “Proper Placing”?3 The words too seem to
I also offer my salutations to the vast and growing circle order themselves. There is no other way of expressing my
of disciples and devotees of Ramana. They are scattered gratitude than to place this biography as an offering at
all over the world. It is their collective spiritual power Ramana’s time-transcending sacred feet.
which has to be the backing for this new biography. It is my prayer to him that readers may be recipients
Over the past several decades we have vast, varied, of his ever-flowing grace.
and authentic material about Ramana which was either
not available to or could not be used by the earlier A.R. NATARAJAN
biographers. It is now nearly seventy years since the first
December 14, 1999
biography was written. There is need for new insights and
xi\n--- 第13页 ---\nTimeless in Time
xii\n--- 第14页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
Section I: Who are you Ramana?
Who are you Ramana? the power of his penance, was so evident that it attracted
seekers, visitors, and even children. Just to be in his
In the recesses of the hearts of all, beginning peace-filled presence was enough. He was golden-hued
with Hari, the pure intellect shines as the Self, as and handsome with large, powerful, and lustrous eyes.
Arunachala Ramana. When the mind melts in Who could resist his magnetism and fail to recognize his
love for him, the subtle eye of pure intellect opens unique spiritual state?
and reveals himself as pure consciousness.1 An ascetic, Amritanatha Yati took the liberty of
—Bhagavan Ramana requesting Ramana to clarify as to which of the great
Hindu Gods had incarnated in his human form. He
The light of lights that shines within
wrote in Malayalam a verse imploring Ramana to reveal
The deep heart’s core,
whether he was Vishnu (Hari) or Siva Guru (Kartikeya),
All in one and one in all
Yativara (Siva), or Vararuchi.
True seer in whom all truth is seen.2
Ramana replied in the same Malayalam meter, on
—Muruganar
the same paper. The answer was altogether at a different
Ramana was a student in the tenth standard, staying level. Ramana was no particular form nor any of the
in his uncle’s house in Madurai. It was July 17, 1896. He Gods. Who was he then? Arunachala Ramana is the pure
was studying in the rooms upstairs when it happened. intellect shining in the hearts of all. He is the life of lives,
A sudden, gripping fear of death made him question, the fullness of consciousness in each and every one. As
intensely, his true identity. It took the form of the
Muruganar had sung, “He is the light of lights that shines
query “Who am I?” Such was his passion to know that
within the deep heart’s core.”
straightaway the enquiry merged him in the source of
Ramana would hint at this truth time and again.
consciousness, in the divine current. “I” being a divine
Here one could refer to the vision which a devotee,
current, fear ended once for all. This awareness of the
Raghavachari, had round about the year 1910. This devo-
natural “I”-consciousness remained steadily thereafter
tee wished to know the true form of Ramana. He told him,
unaffected by the outer activities in which he might be
“Just as Arjuna wished to see the form of Sri Krishna, I
engaged. He became the Enlightened One when he was
wish to have the vision of your real form.” Then he saw
only sixteen years of age.
the form of Ramana disappear, as also that of the picture
Who can understand the state of the one of Dakshinamurti which was behind him. “There was
Who has dissolved his ego and just empty space.” After some time he saw these forms
Is abiding always in the Self? reappear preceded by a blazing light. Such was the im-
For him the Self alone is. pact of this vision that for one month he did not go back.
What remains for me to do?3 When he did, he picked up the necessary courage to ask
Then why had he to move to Arunachala?4 For Ramana the true meaning of this experience. Ramana
told him. “You wanted to see my form. You saw my disap-
its call was irresistible and had to be obeyed. Ramana
pearance. I am formless. So, that experience might be the
had been aware of the glory of Arunachala from the
age of innocence and he felt its presence in the heart.5 truth. Further visions may be according to your conception
Providence had cast him in the role of a universal guru, a derived from the study of Bhagavad Gita.”6
role that he had to perform there. Consequently he never Ramana would also assure devotees that he was not
left the place after he arrived on September 1, 1896. The bound by time or space. They could feel his presence
entire period of his guidance as sadguru for fifty-four in their hearts wherever they were. Eleanor Noye while
years, till his mahanirvana on April 14, 1950, was at this traveling in Kashmir and north India, under unimaginable
one place. There is no parallel to this. conditions, could hear Ramana’s assurance “I am always
In 1899, Ramana shifted to the Virupaksha Cave on with you wherever you go.” She writes, “His dear face was
the Arunachala hill. Till 1907 he remained outwardly ever before me, no matter what I was doing. His presence
silent as well. However, the radiance of his Self-knowledge, filled my heart.”7
1\n--- 第15页 ---\nTTiimmeelleessss iinn TTiimmee
Due to compelling family circumstances Sundaresa Ramana is the all-pervasive Self ever present every-
Iyer had to seek a job in another place and was distraught where. Even so he revealed himself in various percep-
at the thought that he had to leave Ramana’s presence. tions to some of his ardent devotees.
Ramana reassured him by remarking to devotees, “Here To Muruganar, Ramana was the supreme power.
is someone who has been with me for forty years and is now Th erefore, for him, all the Gods of the Hindu pantheon
saying that he is going somewhere away from Bhagavan.”8 radiated only Ramana’s power though named diff erent-
Subbaramayya would attend Ramana’s jayanti (birth- ly. He says so categorically in some of the verses of Tiru
day) celebrations every year. However, he could not do Undiyar.11 In this composition there are also some verses
so in 1943. When he came later another devotee mildly on Ramana relating him to Lord Buddha, the upholder of
chided him saying that on such occasions one should be the value of compassion, and Lord Jesus Christ, suff ering
in Bhagavan’s presence. Ramana promptly told him, “Th e from crucifi xion, on to expiate the sins of others.12
feet of Bhagavan are everywhere! So where can we gather Later in 1917, while composing Ramana Gita,
except at his feet?”9 What reassurance through a simple Ganapati Muni records that he had several visions
statement of fact that Ramana is available to every in- which repeatedly confi rmed his belief. To him only the
turned mind seeking his presence in the heart. name was diff erent, but the power was the same.13 In
Ganapati Muni had many intense spiritual ex- Chandogya Upanishad, the science of the Self was taught
periences while he was staying at Sirsi far away from to sage Narada by Sanatkumara. Drawing a parallel from
Ramanasramam. Initially he was depressed at the fact his own life the Muni felt that Ramana’s role was identi-
that he was away from his guru at this juncture. But soon cal. It was not only to reveal to him the direct path to
this depression passed away because of his strong faith Self-knowledge but also to make the path easily acces-
“in the space-transcending might of Ramana’s glory like sible to all.
the rays of the sun.”10
Here it may be mentioned that there are some in-
dications in Ramana’s statements which lend support
to this view. Aft er his enlightenment, while leaving his
home for Arunachala, Ramana left a note beginning with
the words, “I have, in search of my father and in obedi-
ence to his command, started from here.”14 On reaching
Arunachala he went straight to the sanctum sanctorum
of the Arunachaleswara temple and reported, “Father, I
have come.”15
To appreciate the perception of Muruganar, Muni,
and many others like Viswanatha Swami, and Swami
Sankarananda Bharathi, one has to have a background
of Hindu beliefs. Veda Vyasa identifi ed Sri Krishna, the
leader of Bhagavad Gita, as an incarnation of Vishnu.
Similarly Adi Sankara has been regarded as the incarna-
tion of Siva.
Th ere have been other perceptions of Ramana as well
because he defi es all the time-honored classifi cations.
Many found that their mental conceptions about him
were far removed from reality.
Swami Siddeswarananda was under the general be-
lief that jnanis were devoid of devotion till he himself saw
Ramana’s state while reading some devotional poetry. He
reported the same to Paul Brunton. “One morning at 7
o’clock when I was sitting in the hall, I asked the Maharshi
about a certain verse by Nammalwar embodying his vi-
sion of cosmic consciousness. Th e Maharshi replied, ‘I
shall recite some similar verses from another poet of the
Tamil language. Pay attention to my way of repeating the
words and you will be able to understand, even though you
are a Malayali from the west coast.’Th e verse referred to
22\n--- 第16页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
divine love. A shaft of sunlight fell through the window world, like the sun, which by its mere presence gives us
onto his face. He had read out barely two lines, when I light and life.”19
noticed tears trickling down his face. Th en he stopped All said and done, a jnani like Ramana must remain
speaking, as though he felt too keenly and emotionally an enigma. He once told Subbaramayya, “However much
the meaning of the words. Th ere was an atmosphere of a jnani might talk, he is still a silent one. However much
love around him. For two or three hours he remained si- he might work, he is still a quiet one. His voice is the incor-
lent, the rest of the poem unread, the book resting on his poreal voice. His walk is not on the earth, it is like measur-
knee, his eyes open in a trance of divine emotion.”16 ing the sky with the sky.”20 Th erefore while attempting to
Yet another angle of perception would be to look at
comprehend the true stature or glory of Ramana one is
him as a perfect human being. Viewing him thus Ganapati
reminded of one of his own verses which reads:
Muni fi nds him to be an ideal held out before mankind.
Why? For he combined in himself the vast peace of the Master, you have till this day kept me at your feet
silent mind while being at the same time the repository of And Master, when people ask me,
all power as well. His extraordinary dispassion was com- What is your nature? you make me stand with
bined with a heart which melted in love. Truly he was a Head hung down, a speechless statue.21
“Purushottama, a man among men.”17 N
Muruganar too expresses the same feeling in one of
his soul stirring poems.
No form he has, no name, no quality. Tiruchuzhial:
Still there besides the holy hill he dwells Birth Place of Sri Ramana
In human form, known by the comely name
Of Ramana, marked by the primal power
Self that dances as unbroken bliss in devotees’
Of love: with moist eyes showering grace for all
hearts. Siva unique, the light supreme that shines
To see.18
unceasing in bright Tiruchuzhi, bestow your grace
Such was his exalted state that his very presence was on me and shine as Heart within my heart.1
a benediction to mankind “enough to bless the whole —Bhagavan Ramana
3\n--- 第17页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Bhuminatha temple tank in Tiruchuzhi
Tiruchuzhi is an important place of pilgrimage from There is a holy tank in front of the temple. This is
ancient times. The temple dedicated to Lord Siva as Sri called Trisula Tirtham as it was created by a mere stroke
Bhuminatha is noted for its antiquity and held in deep of Lord Siva’s weapon, the trisulam. In the Tamil month
veneration. There is a separate shrine for the consort of of Masi (Feb-March) the waters of this tank rise notice-
Lord Siva named Sahayavalli. ably just before the full moon day.
This temple has been visited by ancient Tamil saints Ramana once recalled this feature of the temple tank
famous for their devotion—Sri Appar, Sri Sundarar, Sri
when Suri Nagamma reported to him about her visit to
Manickavachagar, and Sri Vageeshar. Here they sponta-
Tiruchuzhi. “The water will not be so good at this time
neously poured forth-beautiful classical Tamil songs in
of the year. In the month of Magha, on the day of the star
praise of this God and his consort.2
Magha, it swells and the water rises. The abhisheka festival
Among these the most famous compositions are by
of the Deity is celebrated on that day, that is, on the 10th
Sundarar. The English translation of a few of these verses
day of the Brahmotsavam. That day, the Deity is brought
is given hereunder:
to the mandapam there and the abhishekam is done with
Verse 1: Tiruchuzhial has groves in which swarms of
the water of the Trisula Tirtham. After the abhishekam is
bees, longing for honey, hum melodiously. It is the resi-
over, all the people bathe in that tank. In my boyhood days,
dence of the Lord Who abides as body, as soul living in it
all of us used to join together and draw on the steps some
(body), as wide-open space, as sky discharging rain, and
signs in order to see how much water rose everyday. It used
as the intellect (buddhi) which experiences the fruits of
to be amusing. The rising of the water used to start ten days
deeds (karma). The attendants of Yama will not torment
those who, in various ways, think of Tiruchuzhial. earlier and used to submerge the steps at the rate of one
Verse 5: The Lord’s abode is Tiruchuzhial. He is our step per day. The tank would become full by the full moon
Relative. He wears the waxing moon on His matted hair. day. To us it was great fun.”4
His mind has mastery over the five senses. He is pleased Tiruchuzhi is a small town and administrative center
to reside forever in Tiruchuzhial. Those who have learnt in Ramanathapuram district in South India. It is about 38
to chant His sacred Name fare well on the path of salva- miles from the city of Madurai where later Ramana was
tion. It is our duty to chant His Name.3 to become an Enlightened One.
4\n--- 第18页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
Ramana’s father’s house in Tiruchuzhi
Tiruchuzhi has become a hallowed place because of kil (pleader) of the town. There were no certified pleaders
the birth of Ramana here on December 30, 1879. He was then. He was obliging, sweet, and agreeable in speech and
born as the second child to the pious couple Sundaram manners. He was also handsome. His complexion was
Iyer and Azhagammal. very fair and he was of medium stature. Those who want-
The house in which Ramana was born is in Kartikeyan ed to have a meal or quarters to stay for a while would
Street in Tiruchuzhi very near to the main temple. By
go to him and be invited as a matter of course. His house
divine grace the house in which he was born has been was terraced and had two compartments (portions).”1
acquired by Sri Ramanasramam and is called Sundara
Sundaram Iyer was a private vakil at Tiruchuzhi in
Mandiram. There is special worship for Ramana daily in
the 1880s. He did not have any degrees or diplomas in
the room in which he was born.
law. Yet, on account of his intelligence and common
Tamil scholars have pointed out a significance for the
sense, by his clever advocacy and winning manners, by
name Tiruchuzhi. In Tamil Karuchuzhi means karma-
his character, personality, and integrity, he commanded
bound destiny. Tiruchuzhi is grace-bound destiny.
a lucrative practice in the court of the sub-magistrate
Therefore it is believed that a transformation takes place
of Tiruchuzhi and also won the love, esteem, and confi-
if one remembers Ramana, who made this sacred place
dence of the people of the locality. He was truly regarded
incomparable by his birth. Those who do so would be
freed from karma-bound destiny and be shielded by the as a benevolent master by the oppressed and downtrod-
bounty of his grace. den. To the poor and distressed, he was verily the Lord
N and Master. Even the so-called criminals looked upon
him as their protector and benefactor.2
Once Sundaram Iyer had to appear in some cases
Blissful Parents in the magistrate’s camp in a village a few miles from
Tiruchuzhi. The magistrate too had to reach the village
“I was reading in the Third Standard in the Taluk Board in his double bullock cart, which sped along pompously.
School at Tiruchuzhi when Maharshi was reading in the It overtook Sundaram Iyer’s cart and moved on without
Fourth Standard. He was about ten or eleven then. His fa- keeping company with the vakil’s cart. The modest va-
ther, Sundaram Iyer, was well-known as a prominent va- kil was left far behind as the “magistrate, amidst official
5\n--- 第19页 ---\nTimeless in Time
pomp and the jingling of bells, disappeared around the and generous man. All day and night, his house would be
bend of the road.” filled with guests, poor and needy. He was never tired of
He could have hardly foreseen what awaited him feeding people. In his office he commanded very great
there. Thieves surrounded his cart. The magistrate’s respect and as a lawyer he had to move about places and
personality, his threats, and the protests of the liveried conduct his cases. The magistrates, wherever he went,
servant were all in vain. “The cart driver stood rooted to paid him great respect. His fame was so great and he was
the spot in terror. The thieves snatched the despatch box so much renowned for his upright character that both the
and were about to retreat in good order. But Lo! behind parties, the accused and those who accuse, would come
the hedge came a shout, ‘Oh! The vakil sami is coming!’ to him with a request to represent them. On several oc-
The box was left on the road and the thieves took to their casions what he told them was law and both the parties
heels. The magistrate didn’t hurry on but waited for the reconciled with equal happiness.”5
other cart. He got down from the cart and with folded Sundaram Iyer and Azhagammal were a united cou-
hands apologized to Sundaram Iyer for leaving him be- ple. Ramana himself has immortalized their relationship
hind. ‘Hereafter I will understand whom the people love in his verse: “O! Arunachala, may I and you, like Azhagu
and esteem. It is a lesson for me and it has made me shed and Sundaram, become one and remain indivisible.”6
my official pride and learn humility,’ he said, and for the It may be mentioned that Azhagu means beautiful in
rest of the way they kept company.”3 Tamil and Sundaram connotes beautiful in Sanskrit.
The Raja of Ramnad once camped at Tiruchuzhi to N
arrange for the work of reclamation and renovation of
the sacred shrine of Bhuminatha at Tiruchuzhi. All the
local officials and people of repute called on him and paid Born With a Purpose
their respects. Having heard about Sundaram Iyer the
Raja was keen on meeting him and inviting him to help
In Tiruchuzhi, the holy town of Bhuminatha, I was
in the sacred task. Much to the Raja’s disappointment,
born to Sundara and his good wife Sundari. To res-
Sundaram Iyer did not call on him even though he had
cue me from this barren worldly life, Arunachala
camped at Tiruchuzhi for three days and three nights.
Siva in the form of a Hill famous throughout the
Finally the Raja himself sent for Sundaram Iyer. The Raja
universe, gave me His own state of bliss, so that
asked him whether he had offended him in any way, for
His heart might rejoice, so that His own Being as
among all the important people of Tiruchuzhi he alone
Awareness might shine forth and His own Power
had not called on him. Sundaram Iyer was surprised. might flourish.1
He explained that being an ordinary person he had not
—Bhagavan Ramana
thought of calling on the Raja. He had no business with
the Raja and had not imagined that the Raja would have It was Monday, December 30, 1879. It was the Tamil
any need for him either. The Raja was overjoyed to meet month of Margazhi, which has been set apart tradition-
this great man who in his
humility did not realize
his own importance and
that nothing could be done
at Tiruchuzhi without
him. The Raja requested
Sundaram Iyer to cooper-
ate with him in his efforts
to renovate the temple. The
work went on well and he
proved to be of great help
to the Raja.4
T.P.R. writes, “Bhaga-
van rarely spoke about his
father. But what little he
told me about him is worth
recording. He told me that
his father was a courageous
Ramana’s parents, Sundaram Iyer and Mother Azhagammal
6\n--- 第20页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
ally for remembering God’s power and protec-
tion through visits to temples, going around
the streets in the early morning singing songs
full of devotional fervor and so on. The holy
Christmas season was being celebrated all over
the world. The sacred village of Tiruchuzhi, and
the devotees of Siva, God of gods, Mahadeva,
were celebrating the holy Ardra Darsana day.
The procession of Bhuminatheswara was slowly
returning to the temple at 1 a.m. The star in the
constellation was Punarvasu, also considered
to be special. It was at that time that Ramana
was born. It was the birth of the birthless, born
for the welfare of the world.
He was the second son of his parents and
was named Venkataraman. Among those pres-
ent at the time of his birth was a blind lady
who was blessed with a vision of light. She told
others present there, “He who is born today in
your house must be a divine being.”2 How true
indeed were these words, how prophetic! Later
events and the years to come were to prove this
beyond doubt.
Osborne remarks, “The child was born
a little later, both in the time of the day and
year than the divine child of Bethlehem,
nearly two thousand years ago. The same co-
incidence marked the end of earthly life also,
for Sri Ramana left his body in the evening
of April 14, a little later in time and date than Room of Ramana’s birth
Good Friday.”3 The analogy might be because like Jesus, Through the centuries the hill has been beckoning
Ramana was a pathfinder. He revealed a way of life by seekers of truth and has become the home of many seers
following which one could be born anew. and sages.
In the autobiographical quotation at the beginning Having declared the purpose of his birth Ramana also
of this chapter, Ramana himself has declared the purpose writes about how the power of Arunachala operated on
of his birth. What was it? It was to proclaim the power, him to fulfill its purpose. Firstly from his age of innocence
the glory of Arunachala Siva in the form of a hill. What it made him aware in his innermost heart of “the immen-
was that power? The power to guide on the path of Self- sity of Arunachala.” Its grace was operating on him all the
knowledge and to bestow it. This power is hidden but can time. He refers to this in one of his hymns: “As mother
be discovered by everyone whose inner eye of wisdom and father both, you gave birth to me and tended me. And
has opened. It is only in a still mind that the truth is re- before I could fall into the deep sea called jaganmaya, and
vealed and the very thought of Arunachala stills the mind. get drowned in the universal illusion, you came to abide
In his hymns on Arunachala, Ramana says, “Look, there in my mind, you drew me to yourself, O Arunachala, you
it stands as if insentient. Mysterious is the way it works, whose being is all Awareness. What a wonderful work of
beyond all human understanding. From my unthinking art your Grace has wrought, my Mother-Father-Lord!”6
infancy, the immensity of Arunachala had shone in my Ramana was born in the lineage of the ancient rishi
awareness. But even when I learnt from someone that it Parasara. There is also considerable significance in this.
was only Tiruvannamalai, I did not realize its meaning. Parasara was the first among those who recognized the
When it stilled my mind and drew me to itself and I came all embracing nature of the Vedic God, Agni. In one of
near, I saw that it was stillness absolute.”4 his compositions he says, “Agni glows in every heart
“Though lacking in luster in its appearance as a hill, it and whoever perceives this indweller in the heart cave
is in fact fiery.”5 becomes one with the fullness of consciousness.”7 The
7\n--- 第21页 ---\nTimeless in Time
reference to the heart and fullness of consciousness is this pet name fell into disuse until it was revived by
significant for Ramana’s role as a universal guru was to Ganapati Muni on that epoch-making day, November
awaken source consciousness and some have termed 18, 1907. Because Ramana called his father Nayana, the
his teachings as the “Science of the Heart.” Besides, Self- other members of the family followed suit and gradually
knowledge is referred to as the fire which burns away Sundaram Iyer came to be called Nayana by the entire
karma, the accumulated tendencies which obstruct village for they held him in great regard.3
awareness of the truth. The first form of Arunachala was Once his uncle Subbier found fault with Ramana on
also of a blazing column without beginning and end. This the occasion of a marriage and Ramana went straight to
pillar of light cooled into the form of a hill in answer to the temple of the goddess Sahayambal to pour out his
the prayer of great gods.8 Arunachala is renowned as the heart and derive solace from her.4
“Agni-Linga.” In school Ramana was noted for his phenomenal
memory, and his knowledge of
Tamil grammar. His handwriting
used to be like print. This is seen
from the notebook of his classmate
Kathirvelu at whose request he
had written down his name, class,
and school in English, and added
“Madras Presidency” in Tamil and
numbered the pages.5
There is no photograph of his
boyhood. Ramana recalled that
once a group photograph was
taken and he was asked to hold
a heavy book in his hand to look
studious. Just when the photo-
graph was about to be taken a fly
settled on him and he raised his
arm to brush it off. No copy of the
photograph is available.6
It is believed that once an
ascetic who was not given a meal
by Sundaram Iyer’s ancestors left
Kalayar temple on the Koundinya river near Tiruchuzhi
them with the curse that in each generation one member
of the family would turn ascetic and live on alms begged
Early Years
for sustaining the body. The curse held till then. For one of
Sundaram Iyer’s paternal uncles had renounced home and
Ramana had an elder brother Nagaswami, a younger
turned an ascetic. His own elder brother Venkateswara
brother Nagasundaram, and a sister Alamelu. The chil-
Aiyar had developed dispassion while young and left the
dren grew up happily. Ramana’s ways were so endearing
village on a pilgrimage and never returned. Would the
that he was a hot favorite among the men and women of
curse hold good for one of the three brothers? Would one
Tiruchuzhi, more so of those who did not have children
of them too renounce home for an inward way of life, in
of their own. Among those who loved him dearly were
search of truth? The answer to this question lay in the lap
Tasildar Ganapati Aiyar and Sub-Registrar Narayana
of the future.
Swami Aiyar.1
On the outskirts of Tiruchuzhi was a river Koundinya
Maharshi used to call his father, “Nayana,” the cor-
whose sands used to be the playground for Ramana and
responding word in Telugu and not “Appa” which is the
his friends. He once recalled, “We used to bathe in the
Tamil word. The reason for this is that a relative of his,
river and pour a vessel full of water on the linga in the
Lakshmana Aiyar, knew Telugu. As a result Ramana
Kalayar temple nearby, offer the food and then eat it.”7
learnt to speak Telugu. This relative also used to call him N
“Ramana,” the name by which he is famous the world
over.2 Later when the family shifted from Tiruchuzhi,
8\n--- 第22页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
Dindigal—Self-Enquiry Begins beating me. All the boys and your uncle beat me to their
heart’s content, but without effect. I knew nothing about it
When he was eleven years old Ramana shifted to Dindigal till they told me next morning.”2
for his studies, since his uncle Subbier was working there. This situation continued even in Madurai, where he
With his photographic memory Ramana has recalled shifted when his uncle was transferred there. “The same
some of the happenings of those years. There was a big sort of thing happened to me in Madurai too. The boys
fort in the place which served as an ideal playground. But didn’t dare touch me when I was awake, but if they had
entry into it was barred by a sentry standing at the gate. any grudge against me they would come when I was asleep
So Ramana and his friends would quietly slip in by scal- and carry me wherever they liked and beat me as much as
ing the wall at the end and jumping down for the fun of they liked and then put me back to bed, and I would know
it. They would get out by a hole at the back of the wall nothing about it until they told me in the morning.”3
after enjoying themselves.1 When Ramana was twelve years old, in 1892, his fa-
Often his sleep in those years was so sound that it is ther Sundaram Iyer died. On the day of the cremation,
difficult to call it such. It was more akin to samadhi for he for several hours Ramana enquired into the meaning of
had no body consciousness even when soundly thrashed. life and death. Paul Brunton has recorded what Ramana
He just could not be woken up. Later, at Ramanasramam, told him about his enquiry on that tragic day.
Ramana narrated dramatically what happened one night “On the day his father died he felt puzzled by death
when all the family members had gone out for a marriage and pondered over it, whilst his mother and brothers
leaving him behind. wept. He thought for hours and after the corpse was cre-
In the afternoon, Bhagavan saw a young relative of mated he got by analysis to the point of perceiving that it
his, in the hall. He said: “Seeing you reminds me of some- was the ‘I’ which makes the body to see, to run, to walk
thing that happened in Dindigal when I was a boy. Your and to eat. ‘I now know this “I” but my father’s “I” has left
uncle, Periappa Seshaiyar, was living there then. There was the body’”4
some function in the house and all went to it and then in Quite obviously the constant awareness of Arunach-
the night went to the temple. I was left alone in the house. I ala-Siva in his heart was cutting at the illusion of a sepa-
was sitting and reading in the front room, but after a while rate individuality, his ego-sense. One can also say that
I locked the front door and fastened the windows and went this was an indication of the things to come, a fore-run-
to sleep. When they returned from the temple no amount of ner of his enlightenment, which was to happen four years
shouting or banging at the door or the window could wake later at Madurai.
N
me. At last they managed to open the door with a key from
the opposite house and then they tried to wake me up by
Tank and gopurams of the Meenakshi temple in Madurai
9\n--- 第23页 ---\nTimeless in Time
The thousand-pillared hall of the Meenakshi temple in Madurai
cant and rarely used by the families in the ground floor.
Madurai Narayanaswami remembers that “he used to see his
friend sit still for long stretches of time in the small room
On the death of Ramana’s father Sundaram Iyer, in on the first floor.”4 On one occasion he asked if he could
1892, the family split up. Azhagammal, and the younger do likewise. On hearing this Ramana made him squat on
children went to Manamadurai, to live with Nelliappa the floor with his legs crossed and pressed a pencil mid-
Iyer. Nagaswami and Ramana stayed with their other way between the eyebrows. Narayanaswami was lost in
uncle Subbier, in Chokkappa Naicken Street, near the a trance for about half an hour. When he got up he saw
Minakshi temple. Ramana studied initially in the Scott’s Ramana smiling at him brightly.5
Ramana and his friends would often play hide
Middle School and later in the American Mission High
and seek and other games in the third-story of Varada
School. He was not studious but his memory helped him
Perumal temple.6
through. He was a natural leader and he excelled in every
In his younger years Ramana used to be called
sport, particularly football and swimming. A schoolmate,
“Tangakkai” (one with golden hands). Once he explained
Subbiah Thevar, recalls how at night both Ramana and
how he got this name. “At all times and in all games, I used
his brother would manage to leave the house along with
to win invariably, were it wrestling or swimming or even
them and spend several hours either playing in the sands
domestic chores. If my aunt began preparing appalams, or
of the Vaigai river or engaging in swimming contests in
such like, she would call me and ask me to put my hand on
Pillaiyarpaliam tank.1
it first. She had great faith in me because I would do every-
Another classmate Sab Jaan recalls how Ramana was
thing according to her wishes and never told lies.”7
injured once in a football game and made his friends
Ramana got a small helping of a particular sweet dish,
anxious because of the resultant high fever. Sab Jaan also
prepared as an offering, on one of his visits to Alagar Koil
recounts that during the weekends they would visit a re-
near Madurai. He enjoyed it very much and wished to
nowned temple of Lord Subrahmanya and that Ramana
have more of it. On his next visit after the worship was
would say, “God’s creation is alike and there is no differen-
over, a priest, who had a large quantity of this dish as his
tiation in creation. God is the same. The apparent differ- share, off-loaded it on Ramana to be carried to his house,
ences were created by man.”2 which was some distance away. Ramana was thus forced
Another side of Ramana is mentioned by his class- to trudge a long way with a heavy load of the sweet dish
mate Narayanaswami. He recalls that the terrace of the on his head. Recalling it Ramana remarked, “You know
house and the small room on the first floor3 were va- how heavy it was! All the muscles of my neck began to
10\n--- 第24页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
From this it is clear that Ramana had deep faith in
ache.… I felt it was a punishment for my wanting to have
God and his omnipotence. However, he had not studied
some more pongal last time I came.”8
any of the scriptures in a systematic manner nor had he
In 1895, when Ramana was fifteen years old, the
received any special instructions from his elders. In later
first call of Arunachala came. He was not aware that
years he could refer to certain fundamental passages in
Arunachala was a sacred hill in Tiruvannamalai. He
the Bible while clarifying the doubts of the seekers be-
met an elderly relative from Tiruchuzhi at Madurai and
cause of the Bible classes which he had attended while at
asked where he was coming from. “From Arunachala,”
school. His study of the Periyapuranam covering the life
was the reply. For the first time he became aware that it
of sixty-three Saivite saints had left a great impact on his
was a place on earth. Excited by the knowledge he asked
mind about the devotional fervor of these saints. Even so
the relative, “What! From Arunachala? Where is that?”9
it is clear that his scriptural knowledge and the practice
The relative wondering how he could be so ignorant in-
of it was hardly enough to prepare him for the enlighten-
formed him that it was Tiruvannamalai. Ramana was to
ment which happened the next day.
be drawn there, irresistibly, less than a year later, under a This is quite surprising because when the fullness
divine compulsion. of knowledge dawns one is completely taken over by
At about the same time, Periyapuranam, the lives the divine and is in its total embrace. Technically called
of sixty-three Saivite saints, came into Ramana’s hands. sakti-patana,3 one’s body and mind, one’s sense of sep-
“The book happened to be in our house and coming across arate individual existence, would be lost in the infinite
it, I looked into it out of curiosity and then becoming inter- ocean of bliss. One would have become “food unto God.”
ested, read the whole book.”10 It moved and inspired him Thereafter every single pore of one’s body would be per-
no end. They were stories filled with yearning for God, as meated by that supreme presence. Unless one is ready
the saints were soaked in devotional fervor and faith. to receive this overwhelming manifestation of the di-
N vine grace, both the body and mind would go haywire.
Therefore one has to go deeper and find out the factors
responsible for this great awakening of Ramana.
The Day Before
You have withheld from me all knowledge of
gradual attainment while living in the world
setting me at peace; such care indeed is blissful and
not painful, for death in life is in truth glorious.1
—Bhagavan Ramana
The day before Ramana’s enlightenment, therefore, as-
sumes great importance. What was Ramana’s state of
mind on July 16, 1896, just a day before his enlighten-
ment? Narasimha Swami, his first biographer, has re-
corded a statement of Ramana about this. Ramana had
told him, “At that time, I had no idea of the identity of that
current of my personality with personal God or Iswara as I
used to term him. I had not even heard of Bhagavad Gita
or other religious works. Except Periyapuranam and the
Bible class texts, the Gospels and Psalms. I had not read
any other religious books. I had just seen, with my uncle,
a copy of Vivekananda’s Chicago address but had not read
it. I could not even correctly pronounce the Swami’s name
but pronounced it Vyvekananda giving the ‘i’ the ‘y’ sound.
I had no notions of religious philosophy, except the current
notion of God that he is an infinitely powerful person, pres-
ent everywhere, though worshipped in special places in im-
ages representing him and other ideas which are contained
The Ramana mandiram: house in which Ramana achieved enlightenment
in the Bible text or Periyapuranam which I had read.”2
11\n--- 第25页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Attention is to be drawn to his samadhi-like sleep awakening of Self-knowledge which happened next day
when he was totally oblivious to the existence of his body spontaneously. His enlightenment, on the following day,
for many hours.4 July 17, 1896, has served to demonstrate to the entire hu-
One should also remember Ramana’s first associa- manity that, given the necessary passion for the goal of
tion with death and what its implication was, when his Self-knowledge and Ramana’s guidance for it through the
direct path of self-enquiry taught by him, discovery of
the truth about oneself would be “very easy,” “very easy”
indeed.
N
Enlightenment—July 17, 1896
There is a first person account by Ramana of his enlight-
enment. “One day I was alone in the first floor of my uncle’s
house. I was in my usual state of health. But a sudden and
unmistakable fear of death seized me. I felt I was going to
die. Why I should have so felt cannot now be explained by
anything felt in the body. I did not however trouble myself
to discover if the fear was well grounded. I did not care to
consult doctors or elders or even friends. I felt I had to solve
the problem myself then and there.”1
The small upstairs room in Ramana mandiram
father died in 1892. At that time by deep introspection
he had arrived at the conclusion that his father’s “I” had
left the body while his “I” was in his body making for the
difference between life and death.5
One must give due significance to the fact men-
tioned by Ramana in one of his autobiographical verses
on Arunachala that from his “unthinking infancy the
immensity of Arunachala had shone in his awareness.”6
Here one has to remember that Arunachala is regarded
as the embodiment of Lord Siva, the greatest of Yogis.
It is said that even the thought of Arunachala has the
power to liberate a person. In Ramana’s case he was in
constant awareness of it from his infancy. In his mind
Arunachala surpassed all grandeur. It may be because of
this that in later years Ramana referred to Arunachala as
his guru. For it is the guru who guides one on the path
to Self-realization.
Therefore, despite appearances to the contrary,
Ramana was already totally ripe and ready for the
12\n--- 第26页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
“The actual inquiry and discovery of ‘Who am I?’ was all. In later years he was accessible all the time and has
over on the very first day, after a short time. Instinctively I clarified more than thirty thousand doubts. A devotee
held my breath and began to dive inward with my inquiry sought Ramana’s explanation for these outward appear-
into my own nature .… I stretched myself like a corpse, and ances. “We note so many outward changes in you.” “Yes,”
it seemed to me that my body had actually become rigid— replied Bhagavan, “that is because you see me as this body.
‘I’ was not dead—‘I’ was on the other hand conscious of be- So long as you identify yourself with your body, you can-
ing alive, in existence. So the question arose in me, ‘What not but see me as an embodied being.” He also explained,
was this “I”?’ I felt that it was a force or current working, “I am ever the same. There is neither sankalpa, desire, nor
despite the rigidity or activity of the body, though existing change in me. Till I reached the Mango Cave I remained
in connection with it. It was that current or force or center indifferent with my eyes shut. Afterwards I opened my eyes
that constituted my personality, that kept me acting, mov- and am actively functioning. Otherwise there is no change
ing etc. The fear of death dropped off. I was absorbed in whatsoever in me.”8
the contemplation of that current. So further development
or activity was issuing from the new life and not from any
fear.”2
Ramana explained in later years that as soon as he
commenced his “Who am I?” enquiry “some force, call
it the atmic power or anything else, arose in me and took
possession of me.”3
What happened thereafter has also been narrated by
Ramana to Narasimha Swami. “That changed my mental
attitude and habits. I had formerly some preferences and
aversions. All these dropped off and all food was swallowed
with equal indifference. I would put up with every burden
imposed on me at home, every slight at my expense by the
boys. Studies and duties became a matter of utter indiffer-
ence and I was going through studies turning over pages
mechanically.”4
His awakening gave him the continuous feeling of
awareness of the force in which he was “perpetually ab-
sorbed, whatever he did, whether he read, walked, spoke,
or rested.”5
The obsession also led to his visiting the temple of
Minakshi Sundaresa every day. He would stand, emotion-
charged, for a long time before Siva, Nataraja, Minakshi,
and sixty-three saints.6
The enlightenment was possible because of a mas-
sive upsurge of divine grace whose flood-tide swept away
all limitations, springing from the ignorance of one’s
true nature. He was illumined by the powerful grace of Ramana was categoric about the completeness of his
Arunachala. Was he not born with the constant remem- experience. Nothing further was revealed. He made this
brance of its grandeur?7 position clear to philosophy professor D.S. Sarma.
After his enlightenment, there was no change in the Sarma: In Western mysticism three definite stages
state of Ramana’s steady Self-abidance. It is necessary to are often spoken of—viz. purgation, illumination, and
clarify this point. For, to the observer, his outward conduct union. Was there any such stage as purgation—corre-
might appear different from time to time. For instance he sponding to what we call sadhana—in Bhagavan’s life?
was visiting the Minakshi temple every day for six weeks, Bhagavan: I have never done any sadhana. I did not
but after reporting his arrival to Arunachaleswara he even know what sadhana was. Only long afterwards I came
never stepped inside the temple again. For eleven years to know what sadhana was and how many different kinds
from September 1896 to November 1907 he remained of it there were. It is only if there was any object or anything
silent. For many years he was absorbed inwardly so fully different from me that I could think of it. Only if there was
that he did not seem to have any body consciousness at a goal to attain, I should have made sadhana towards that
13\n--- 第27页 ---\nTimeless in Time
goal. There was nothing which I wanted to obtain. I am Tiruvannamalai was Tindivanam. Actually in 1892 itself
now sitting with my eyes open. I was then sitting with my the Villipuram-Tiruvannamalai-Katpadi branch line had
eyes closed. That was all the difference. I was not doing any been opened. He then estimated that three rupees would
sadhana even then. As I sat with my eyes closed, people be sufficient for the fare. He left the balance of two rupees
said I was in samadhi. As I was not talking, they said I was in the box itself along with a parting letter2 which reads:
in mauna. The fact is I did nothing. Some Higher Power
in search of my Father and
took hold of me and I was entirely in Its hands.9
I have, in obedience to his command, started from
What happened in 1912 near Tortoise Rock is most
here. THIS is only embarking on a virtuous enter-
significant for understanding the natural state of Ramana
prise. Therefore none need grieve over THIS affair:
since his enlightenment, his uninterrupted awareness of
To trace THIS out, no money need be spent.
the “I”-consciousness in the heart. His respiration had
stopped, his body had become cold, death slowly crept Your college fee has not yet been
on his body. This happened for about some ten or fifteen paid. Rupees two are enclosed Thus,
minutes. While narrating this incident Ramana said, “Yet herewith -------------
my usual current was continuing, without a break in that
state also.”10
N
The Father’s Command
The moment I thought of your name, you caught
and drew me to yourself.
Who can know the greatness of your grace
Arunachala?1
—Bhagavan Ramana
It was on August 29, 1896, about six weeks after his en-
lightenment. Ramana’s indifference to his studies there-
after received numerous reprimands from his uncle and
jeers from his brother Nagaswami. That day he began
writing the imposition given to him to copy certain
portions from Bain’s English Grammar. He had to do
so thrice. After he wrote it twice the futility of it struck
Original letter written by Ramana
him with great force. He stopped writing and lapsed into
meditation drawn by the divine current within. Seeing The letter was not signed, for his separate identity
this his brother remarked, “Why should one, who be- as Venkataraman had been lost after the discovery that
haves thus, retain all this?” This was not the first occasion his true identity was the divine current in the heart. The
that he had taunted him thus. But this time the truth of omission of a signature is clearly not due to lack of time
the remark went home. Ramana regarded it as the com- in the hurry to catch the train. There has been time to
mand from his father Arunachala. He could no longer inscribe a series of dashes in lieu of the signature, and
stay at home. So Ramana decided to leave his home for thereafter to add even a postscript, to inform the brother
Tiruvannamalai. about his unpaid college fee, and the balance of money
He informed his brother Nagaswami that he had left. Even these later lines are all impersonal, “Your col-
to attend a special class in electricity at school. He said, lege fee has not been paid” says the postscript, but does
“Well then, do not fail to take five rupees from the box not add by whom. There is no such phrase as “by me” or
below and to pay my college fees in the college near “by this.” And lastly about the two rupees left, reference
your school.” Arunachala had provided him with the is made to the inert silver lying with the letter. It is purely
money needed for the journey. He went down, gulped a impersonal. How eloquent are these indications of the
quick meal served by his aunt who gave him five rupees. alteration in his personality! Later Ramana told Kapali
Then he hastily looked up an atlas which, unfortunately, Sastri in 1929, “You see in the letter at home at the time
was outdated, and thought that the nearest station to of starting, I first wrote ‘in obedience to his command’ and
14\n--- 第28页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
interposed above it ‘in search of my father and’ because it One or two stations after Madurai an old Maulvi
is he who drew me. I wrote that and started. The finding with a flowing beard asked him, “Where are you going
of funds was not my act. My brother of his own accord did Swami?” Ramana replied. “To Tiruvannamalai and I have
it.”3 a ticket up to Tindivanam.” Hearing this the co-passenger
The word “search” might appear dualistic. But one told him, “You are a queer passenger to go to Tindivanam
must remember in this context that Ramana had heard for Tiruvannamalai. I am also going there and we should
about Tiruvannamalai for the first time from a relative change the train at Villipuram.” The Father had provided
and no further data about how to reach the place. His the requisite information. Ramana recalled later that this
looking up the old atlas for locating the place is indicative person had told him that he was going to Tirukoilur but
of this. Ramana had never traveled on his own to any new strangely enough he missed him when after some sta-
place and the journey also indicates that he had to make tions he looked in the carriage.4
enquiries to reach the destination. The words “in obedi- Then, till about sunset he remained absorbed in the
ence to father’s command” are used, for after his enlight- Self. When the train reached Tiruchirapalli junction
enment, Ramana had no will or volition of his own, and he felt hungry and purchased two country pears. But
was acting only according to the dictates of providence. strangely his hunger was satisfied with just a little bite
After writing the letter, Ramana hurriedly walked of one of the fruits. He had a hearty appetite. This was
to the station as the scheduled time of departure for his therefore quite surprising. He went back to his state
train was 11.45 a.m. and it was already 12 noon when he of natural samadhi. At about 3 a.m. the train reached
could leave. Since Ramana had left home as per the divine Villipuram, where he alighted. After day break he went
commandment it was its duty to ensure that he reached round the streets of the place to find the direction to
the destination. Hence, though he was late, the train too Tiruvannamalai for it was obvious that he had to walk
was late. He bought a ticket to Tindivanam and three an- the rest of the distance. The sign posts indicated only the
nas was returned to him as the balance. Had he looked place Mambalapattu, which was en route. Tired by his
at the railway timetable he would have noticed that a few wanderings he felt hungry and went to a hotel but had
stations below, Tiruvannamalai had been mentioned and to wait for several hours for the lunch time which was at
the fare was exactly three rupees which he had taken. His noon. The owner of the hotel was greatly impressed by
body had to suffer more hardships though his mind was the golden complexioned teenager, with asceticism writ
immersed in bliss. large on his face, with ruby earrings, and jet black locks
Ariyaninallur temple
15\n--- 第29页 ---\nTimeless in Time
of hair. After his meal Ramana offered the little change he a nearby place to get water. As he walked there with the
had. The hotel owner waived the amount due for the meal. rice on a leaf plate, overcome by exhaustion he fainted.
Ramana returned to the station and with the change left When he came around shortly thereafter, a small crowd
with him he purchased a ticket to Mambalapattu which had gathered. He drank the water given to him, collected
he reached by 3 p.m. in the afternoon. Thirty miles still the scattered rice, ate it, and then lay down on the bare
separated him from his Father’s home. He had no option ground and slept. Even the most stone-hearted cannot
except to walk the distance. By nightfall he reached the but be moved to tears at the plight of this illumined one’s
Ariyaninallur temple after walking ten miles. Tired by body that night.
the walk and heat he waited for the temple to be opened. The next morning, August 31, was Gokulashtami, an
When it was opened, Ramana entered and sat down in important festival day in honor of Lord Krishna. Ramana
the pillared hall, the only portion which was not yet quite stopped at random at a house which happened to be that
dark. He immediately beheld a brilliant light covering the of Muthukrishna Bhagavatar and asked for food. The
whole temple. He thought that it must be from the main couple were delighted to have a brahmin youth with lu-
shrine of the deity but found it was not. It disappeared minous eyes as their guest on that day. The lady of the
and he continued in his usual state. After worship he house gave him a large meal right away and insisted af-
asked the priest for something to eat. He was told that fectionately on his having the whole of it. The only pos-
he might get some food at the nearby temple in Kilur. So session which Ramana had was his earrings which he
he went there, where again after the worship the priest pledged for four rupees with the Bhagavatar, who insist-
refused to give him food. But the drummer, seeing the ed on giving him a receipt and his address. Ramana tore
boy’s plight and his ascetic behavior, offered his share up the slip after leaving his house. Before Ramana left, he
to him. Ramana was thirsty and he was asked to go to was lovingly given lunch as well as a packet of sweets for
the journey. Since there was no train till
the next morning he slept at the station.
What hardships his sacred body had to
undergo for obeying his Father’s com-
mand.
N
Advent at Arunachala
Arunachala, my loving lord, place
your garland on my shoulders and
wear this my garland on your
own.l
—Bhagavan Ramana
It was the morning of September 1,
1896, when Ramana reached his Father’s
home, Arunachala. The command had
been obeyed. The search had ended.
Thereafter there was no parting ever.
Heart brimming with love, Ramana
went straightaway to the Arunach-
aleswara temple. This temple was the
very center of attraction of the pilgrims.
But strangely it was empty though all
the doors were open. None was there in
the inner shrine too. The Lord was wait-
ing to receive his son, born to proclaim
his glory and power, to proclaim the di-
rect path for Self-knowledge. Ramana
16\n--- 第30页 ---\nArunachaleswara temple
View of Arunachaleswara temple
could go into the sanctum sanctorum unhindered. Just
the Father and the son together in holy union never again
to part physically. “Father, I have come,” Ramana said.
More words were superfluous. Thanks to the overflowing
grace of Arunachala the schoolboy became the enlight-
ened jnani Ramana at Madurai. This had happened on
July 17, 1896. Now the physical separation too ended. It
could not be otherwise as his task as a universal guru was
to be performed from this one place.
As Ramana left the temple, someone accosted him
and wished to know if he would like to have his hair cut.
When he said “yes,” he was taken to Ayyankulam tank
where there was a congregation of barbers. One of them
completely shaved off his lovely locks of jet-black hair.
Ritual shaving of hair at
This was symbolic of Ramana having renounced the
the Ayyankulam tank
as performed today world. Then Ramana threw away his sacred thread and
17\n--- 第31页 ---\nTimeless in Time
balance of money which he had and the sweets which had inmates of the house came out opening the street door and
been given to him the previous day by the pious couple I ran into the Big Temple. For some days after that, too, it
at Kilur. He never again touched money in his life. By his rained!”3
actions Ramana had renounced attachment to caste and As days passed, the thick growth of hair, which had
to money, outwardly as well. got matted and woven like a basket, made his head heavy.
Ramana then took off the dhoti he was wearing, tore When a suggestion was made for having his head shaven
a portion of it to serve as his cod-piece and threw the rest Ramana readily agreed. This was about a year-and-a-half
away. Even when he was exposed to the elements, to the after his arrival. For awhile he had a feeling of having no
sun, rain, and cold, Ramana wore only a cod-piece for the head!4
rest of his life. Ramana also recalled some other incidents relating
Though traditionally one would have a bath after a to the early period of his stay in the temple. In the first
shave, Ramana simply thought it was an unnecessary four months of his stay he had no bath. One day the wife
luxury for his body. But a sharp shower drenched him of a devotee forcibly gave him a bath. “After I came to
before he re-entered the temple. That night there was a this place, Tiruvannamalai, I had no bath for four months.
heavy downpour. One day, when I was in the compound of the Arunachala
While talking about the rain on the night of the temple, the wife of a devotee by name Ponnuswami came
Golden Jubilee of his arrival,2 Ramana recalled, “I re- unexpectedly, pulled me along, made me sit, cleaned my
member the same thing happened on the night of 1.9.1896 head with soap-nut powder and gave me a bath. She had
when I arrived here. It seems they had no rains for a long been coming to the temple every now and then: so I had
time then. But on that night there was a heavy downpour. thought that she had come as usual, but that day she had
I was then staying at the mandapam in front of the Big come there prepared! That was my first bath.”5
Temple. Only that morning for the first time I had discard- Similarly while he was staying in Gurumurtam an-
ed all my clothes, except a cod-piece, and on account of the other lady, Minakshi, also forcibly gave him a badly
rains beating in, and the cold winds blowing about, I found needed bath as his head got matted due to neglect. “After
the cold unbearable; and so I ran from there and took shel- that Palaniswami came and everything was adjusted into
ter on the pial of the house nearby. About midnight some a routine of daily baths.”6
View of Arunachaleswara temple
18\n--- 第32页 ---\nWho are you Ramana?
Th e son had returned home. People were to wit-
ness the intensity of his penance, the immensity of his
silence, his utter absence of body consciousness, and his
total unconcern for the body. Th e devotees could see it
for themselves since he remained in the various parts of
the Arunachaleswara temple itself for nearly a year aft er
reporting his arrival to his Father, Arunachala.
N
19\n--- 第33页 ---\nTimeless in Time
20\n--- 第34页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Section II: Penance
Penance state of penance. Such penance, however, is spontaneous
and effortless.
The natural state is free from sloth. One established The first place where he did this spontaneous penance
firmly in it is incessantly performing the most dif- was in the thousand-pillared hall in the front portion of
ficult penance, spontaneously.1 the Arunachaleswara temple. There he sat oblivious to
—Bhagavan Ramana his body, fully immersed in the bliss of the Self. He was
not aware either of the passage of day or night. However,
From the onlooker’s point of view, Ramana’s state seems
since he was still a teenager, the urchins around the tem-
to have three or four distinct outward landmarks. The
ple could not understand his state. They would attempt to
first period was the first six weeks after his enlighten-
disturb him by pelting stones at him and enjoy troubling
ment, when he was virtually hiding his momentous ex-
him. Seshadri Swami, who had come to Tiruvannamalai
perience and supreme wisdom. The mantle of the student
earlier, tried to protect him but it was not of much help.
was not discarded, and the family members were not al-
In order to avoid this Ramana just moved into the
lowed to have any idea of his state. Whenever possible
Patalalingam, an underground vault in the thousand-
Ramana would be immersed in the Self.
pillared hall. It was dark and damp. The rays of the sun
The next stage may be said to be the period from
his arrival at Tiruvannamalai on September 1, 1896,
till November 18, 1907, when he broke his silence to
instruct Ganapati Muni on the meaning of tapas. The
doubts of all earnest seekers would be answered, but
their numbers were not large. There were long spells
of immense and powerful silence.
The third and final stage was in the forties when
seekers from all over the world and of all religions
came in their thousands to seek Ramana’s counsel—
the doors were always open to one and all. In this pe-
riod too there would be those indrawn hours but they
were less frequent.
The fourth is the post-nirvana years when his
continued presence as the unfailing “living guru” is
apparent to seekers of truth.
It is necessary to make the point clear for one is
apt to be misguided by the outer appearances into
thinking that there are some differences in Ramana’s
state of natural samadhi. Ramana himself has clari-
fied the correct position categorically, when specifi-
cally questioned about his sadhana.2
The outward differences in Ramana’s conduct
should not be taken to indicate any need for or any
change in Ramana’s state after his enlightenment. It
was always the same steady abidance in the Self. It is
against this background that one is to view Ramana’s
life story after his enlightenment. As mentioned be-
fore, whatever differences there may be for the on-
lookers, Ramana was steadily in the natural state.
One who is so firmly established is in the constant
Inside the Patalalingam shrine
21\n--- 第35页 ---\nTimeless in Time
never penetrated its darkness. It was seldom that any hu- and with closed eyes, despite the noise of our footsteps.
man beings entered that place. Only ants, vermin, and Then we lifted the Swami from the pit, carried him from
mosquitoes flourished there. They preyed upon him and the hall up the flight of steps and deposited him in front
his thighs were covered with sores that ran with blood of a shrine of Subrahmanya. The Swami still remained
and pus. The underground vault served to free him from unconscious, his eyes closed, evidently he was in deep
stone missiles of the misguided youth and he remained samadhi. We noticed the large number of sores on either
immersed in the bliss of being. However, after some side of his thighs and legs, with blood and pus flowing
from some of them, and wondered how
anyone could remain unconscious of his
body amidst such torture. Regarding it as
irreverence, nay impertinence, to make
any further noise in such a presence, we
bowed and came away.”3
Ramana stayed at the Subrahmanya
shrine for a couple of months. He would
sit motionless in samadhi and was looked
after by one of the mendicants in the
temple, the Mouni Swami. Ramana then
moved to a place of tall oleander bushes,
a dense alley of oleander (arali trees) with
cut off stems projecting. “Occasionally I
would sit under one tree and wake up much
further inside. I must have passed through
these projecting stems in my unconscious
condition. Yet I was not hurt at any time.”4
The thousand-pillared hall
time the urchins were emboldened
and started pelting stones into the pit.
Fortunately this was noticed one day
by Venkatachala Mudali who reports
thus: “One day, going near the thou-
sand-pillared hall, I found a group of
boys hurling stones in the direction of
the pit. Enraged at the sight, I seized
a twig, and ran towards the young
scamps who fled promptly. Suddenly
from the dark recesses of the hall there
issued forth the figure of Seshadri. I
was taken aback, but soon recovering
myself, enquired of the Swami if the
stones pelted by the boys had hurt
him. ‘Oh no,’ replied the Swami, ‘but
The Vahana Mantapam
go and see the Chinnaswami there.’
He pointed towards the pit and went away. Proceeding Ramana then moved to Vahana Mantapam or the
inside, I could make out nothing for a while, as I was com- place reserved for the temple vehicles. He recalls, “I would
ing from the glare into the darkness. In a few minutes, the edge through the narrow passage between the vahanas, the
faint outlines of a young face became discernible in that tallest in that mantapam or the interiormost, to escape at-
pit. Somewhat frightened, I went out to the adjoining tention. I would seat myself under the belly of a vahana. I
flower-garden where a sadhu was working with his dis- would lose consciousness of the body then and sometimes
ciples. Mentioning the facts to them I took some of them find, when awake, that I had got to the 10th row. I must
with me. Even then the youthful figure sat motionless have crept into it like a lizard. Whether I did so or some-
2222\n--- 第36页 ---\nPenance
thing carried me in I did not know. Strangely enough, on Though Uddandi Nayanar took upon himself the
not a single occasion did these crawlings or movements duty of being Ramana’s attendant he was often forced
produce even a scratch on my person.”5 to be away, during which time Ramana remained un-
N cared for and unattended. The mischievous boys would
take this opportunity of troubling Ramana again. “One
day, while he was engrossed in samadhi at the foot of the
Gurumurtam illupai tree, a mischievous boy noticing that no one was
around, eased himself on Ramana’s body, dirtying and
In November/December 1896, a large crowd gathered wetting his cod-piece. The young Swami was quite un-
in Tiruvannamalai and in the Arunachaleswara temple aware of what had happened. Sometime later, when his
during the Kartigai festival. Consequently large gather- consciousness revived he wondered why the rags should
ings used to surround the silent youthful sage Ramana. be wet. Then from the smell he gathered that some little
Among them was one Uddandi Nayanar. Seeing Ramana fellow must have played a prank upon him though no
immersed always in samadhi, unaware of his body, he felt boy was by his side at that time. There was no anger at
that he could attain peace of mind by association with such treatment.”2
Gurumurtam
him. Therefore he took upon himself the job of being an At this stage the divine took a hand in protecting
attendant to protect Ramana from the crowd of sightse- Ramana from such a situation. One Annamalai Tambiran
noticed Ramana. He was immediately impressed by the
ers and prevent persecution by urchins. We may say he
luster of the Self radiating from the face of Ramana.
was the first attendant of Ramana.
Tambiran was in charge of his guru’s tomb, Gurumurtam,
Uddandi Nayanar hailed from Tiruvani village near
near Tiruvannamalai. He consulted Nayanar and both of
Tiruvannamalai. A well-built rustic, he made a modest
them decided that it would be best that Ramana should
living by plying his double bullock cart moving people
shift to Gurumurtam where he could be better looked af-
and goods between towns. He was very pious and well
ter. When this suggestion was made to him he attempted
versed in reciting Vedic texts in Tamil like Jnana Vasistam to get up. Noticing this “they happily helped him to his
and Kaivalya Navanitam.1 feet and took him to Gurumurtam.”3
23\n--- 第37页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Bhagavan has given a detailed account of his stay in again into my continuous mood. This was my condition for
Gurumurtam when questioned about it by Narasimha some years from the time of my arrival. For many years I
Swami. This is what he has told him. ate only off my hand without using any leaf plate.
“Days and nights would pass without my being aware “While at Gurumurtam, I had a fairly large number of
of their passing. I entertained no idea of bathing or clean- persons calling to see me and in a sense a reputation had
been established. A number of per-
sons wished that I should eat what
each of them had brought every
day. The difficulty of eating all was
solved this way. A bit of what each
of them had brought, be it solid or
liquid, sweet or salted, fruit or rice,
all would be taken up and mixed
into a sort of sauce and given to
me as a cupful. This would be my
night meal and I would drink it not
minding how this compound mix-
ture tasted.
“I was very much constipated
while at Gurumurtam. I would pass
hard, solid, steel-like square blocks.
I would just sit somewhere and af-
ter some time try to get up. I would
raise myself from my haunches,
half a foot at a time and at once
feel faint and giddy and resume
my old position. Sometime later I
would try to get up and raise myself
a foot or so then feel the same reel-
ing sensation and sit down again.
On one such occasion after many
such failures I got up and tried to
go out and was clutching the front
door. Then Palaniswami came and
held me in his embrace. I turned to
him and asked him (through sign
language) why he behaved thus.
He said that he noticed that I was
about to fall and so he had seized
me to prevent the fall. But I was
holding to the door with both my
hands outstretched and was not
aware that I was about to fall. This
difficulty of getting up on account
of reeling was a constant feature of
ing of teeth or other cleansing activities even when I had my life at Gurumurtam.”4
defecated and had no baths. The face got begrimed, the Narasimha Swami continues the narration thus:
hair had become one clotted mass like wax and the nails “As Swami continued to neglect his comfort, and even
grew long. When anyone thought that I should have food, cleanliness, he rose in popular esteem. His body was
I would stretch a hand and something would drop on my besmeared with unwashed dirt, his hair became a
hand. My hands were not useful for any other purpose. I clotted mass, and his fingernails grew so long and curly
would eat and rub my hand on my head or body and drop that his hands were not useful for any purpose. He sat
2244\n--- 第38页 ---\nPenance
for some weeks on a floor which was always infested by A little after Ramana shifted to Gurumurtam,
ants, and despite their constant crawling and biting, he Palaniswami joined him as the permanent attendant.
sat for hours with eyes closed, leaning against the wall Anyone who knows the life story of Ramana would feel
in samadhi, and left on it the imprint of his back. The indebted to Palaniswami for the more than mother’s
visitors could not endure for even a few minutes the ants, care given by him in protecting Ramana’s body. From
which he endured for hours, days, and weeks, losing his Gurumurtam days till Ramana shifted to Skandasramam
body consciousness. The Swami was therefore provided in 1917, for seventeen long years he was the instrument
after some time with a stool in a corner, the feet of the of the divine for protecting Ramana’s body.
stool being placed in water. But even then his leaning on Ramana would be without any consciousness of the
the wall gave the ants their access to him. People swarmed body lost in the inner bliss most of the time. At those
to see this height of self-neglect. Some said: ‘This Swami times this protection was very valuable. Palaniswami
must be very old,’ and pointed to the length of his nails as would also regularly beg for alms and cook for himself
proof. Many people jumped to the conclusion that, being and Ramana.
so saintly, he could grant them all the boons they desired, The story of how Palaniswami joined Ramana is in-
teresting. He was from Kerala and was worshipping the
such as wealth, health, issue, and salvation, and poured
praises into his ears and offerings at his feet.”5 image of Lord Ganesa in Tiruvannamalai town. One
Srinivasa Iyer, seeing his capacity for devotion and also
Once Tambiran overdid his reverence. He wished
being aware of the need to protect Ramana’s body, ad-
to perform abhisheka (worship by pouring water on the
vised him thus, “What is the use of spending your life
head, which is done for deities). His living deity was
with this stone swami? There is a young swami in flesh
Ramana. He gathered the requisite material required for
and blood at Gurumurtam. He is steeped in austerities
it, namely oil, sandal paste, etc. Noticing this Ramana
like the youthful Dhruva, mentioned in the puranams. If
took a piece of charcoal and wrote on the wall nearby
you go and serve him and adhere to him, your life would
his seat thus. “This (food) alone is service needed for this
serve its purpose.” Others also mentioned to Palaniswami
body.” Ramana meant that looking after his body was
about the glorious state of Ramana, who needed a full-
sufficient. Tambiran understood the wishes which were
time attendant to look after his body. At his very first visit
clearly written on the wall and he refrained from any out-
itself, Palaniswami was certain that he had discovered his
ward show of his inner feelings towards Ramana. Since
guru and savior. For a little while he continued his wor-
Ramana had written in correct Tamil, people understood
ship at the temple of Ganesa. Later he felt that Ganesa
for the first time that he was educated and this was the
himself had led him to Ramana and spent his full time
first step towards his being discovered by his relatives.6
with him like a shadow.8
Amongst the people who held Ramana in great rever-
ence there was one Venkatarama Aiyer, Head Accountant
in the Government Taluk Office at Tiruvannamalai.
Having discovered that Ramana was educated he decided
to find out more about his birthplace and other details.
For this purpose he insistently stayed at Gurumurtam
and went on a hunger strike to achieve his object.
Ramana was always compassionate. Perhaps he also felt
that it was the correct time for the news about his where-
abouts to be known to his mother who must have been
in anguish without any information about him. In this
sense he allowed himself to be discovered. The hunger
strike provided a good reason to reveal his birthplace.
Ramana wrote on the wall, “Venkataraman, Tiruchuzhi.”
When Venkatarama Aiyer wondered where Tiruchuzhi
was, Ramana picked up a copy of Periyapuranam
which was nearby. It related an account of the visit of
Sundaramurthy, one of the famous Saivite saints, to the
temple of Siva called “Bhuminatha” in that village. This
disclosure led before long to his being discovered by his Palaniswami
relatives.7
25\n--- 第39页 ---\nTimeless in Time
N
few houses and return. Ramana had become well known
even in his Gurumurtam days. Hence people used to wait
Arunagirinathar Temple— hoping that he would come to their house for alms.
To avoid disappointing them he would cover differ-
Pachaiamman Koil
ent portions of the street each day. As a result he practi-
cally covered every single house in the street opposite the
Ramana has crossed the fearsome ocean of mis- temple.2
ery and stands on its other shore, uses His hands
Ramana also had two forced lunches. The first was in
soft as lotus to serve Him as a bowl, chases away
the house of the grandfather of T.P. Ramachandra Iyer.
fear from those who take refuge at His lotus-feet,
It happened in 1896. At that time Ramana was staying
by a single refreshing glance.1
in one of the temples in the Arunachaleswara temple
—Ganapati Muni
complex. T.P.R.’s grandfather would come daily and stay
There were two short spells when Ramana begged for for a while and leave. There was no conversation since
alms in the streets. The first was before he shifted to Ramana was silent.
Gurumurtam and the other after he left it. The first time Ramana recalled what happened one afternoon. “In
he begged for alms, he stood before the house of one the noon, before meal time, he came to me with another
of the younger priests. Though there was no feeling of person. Standing on either side they said, ‘Swami, get up.
abasement, due to his upbringing and habit, he felt bash- Let us go.’ ‘Why?’ I enquired by signs. They told the pur-
ful. Sometimes he would get only stale gruel at a house. pose. I refused. But would they go? They were prepared to
He would take it even without salt or any other flavoring, carry me in their arms forcibly.... I knew they were inviting
in the open street, then wipe his hands on his head and me with great devotion. So, thinking it was no use arguing
pass on happily. with them I walked with them.”3 The other forced meal
The second period was in August-September, 1898, was at the Isanya Math. This was in his Virupaksha years.
when he begged for alms after he left Gurumurtam. At Ramana labeled it a “funny story” and narrated it humor-
that time he was staying in the Arunagirinathar tem- ously. “One day when Palaniswami and myself went round
ple. The first person whose house he visited was that of the hill and came near the temple it was 8 p.m. As we were
one Krishna Iyer who was playing cards when Ramana tired, I lay down in the Subrahmanya temple. Palani went
clapped his hands. He hurriedly mixed some rice and out to fetch food from the choultry. He (the head of the
gave him alms. Ramana would mostly beg at night. He mutt) was going into the temple. As usual there were a
would accept only two or three handfuls of food from a number of disciples around him. One of them saw me and
Pachaiamman shrine
2266\n--- 第40页 ---\nPenance
told them about it. That was enough. While returning, he I would secretly mend my cod-piece with thread taken out
came with ten of his disciples and stood around me. He of it with prickly pear thorn for needle.”5
began saying, ‘Get up Swami. We shall go.’ I was in mouna When the devotees discovered the sorry state of his
then, so I showed by signs that I wouldn’t accompany them. towel and the cod-piece they were filled with remorse at
Was he the man to listen to me? ‘Lift him up bodily, lift,’ their neglect.
he said to his disciples. As there was no alternative, I got During the plague, the staff in charge of disinfec-
up. When I came out, there was a bandy ready. ‘Get in, tion used to visit Ramana frequently. They had invited
Swami,’ he said. I declined and showed them by signs that I Ramana for a session of devotional singing after their
would prefer to walk and suggested that he should get into work was over. All of a sudden they turned up after mak-
the bandy. He took no notice of my protestations. Instead, ing elaborate preparations for the same. Ramana had to
he told his disciples, ‘What are you looking at? Lift Swami go and was duly garlanded and honored. This is the only
and put him in the cart.’ There were ten of them and I was public function Ramana attended in his fifty-four years
alone. What could I do? They lifted me bodily and put me stay at Tiruvannamalai.
N
into the cart. Without saying anything more, I went to the
mutt. He had a big leaf spread out for me, filled it with
food of all kinds, showed great respect
and began saying ‘Please stay here al-
ways.’ Palaniswami went to the temple,
enquired about me, and then came to the
mutt. After he came, I somehow man-
aged to escape from them.”4
After Ramana moved over to
Virupaksha Cave in 1899, for about six
months he had to shift to Pachaiamman
Koil, due to the outbreak of plague in
Tiruvannamalai. One is almost reduced
to tears while reading about the tat-
tered condition of the only cod-piece
and towel Ramana had at that time.
To Ramana of course it was a matter
of indifference as could be seen from
the humorous way he has narrated this
fact. “When I was at Pachaiamman Koil,
I had a small towel which was tattered
and torn, almost to rags, with threads
having come out in most places. Once a
cowherd boy made fun of this torn rag
by telling me, ‘The governor wants this
towel.’ I replied, ‘Tell him I won’t give it
to him!’ I never used to spread it out in
public. I used to keep it rolled into a ball
and wipe my body, hands, or mouth as
the occasion demanded with the towel so
rolled up into a ball. I used to wash it
and dry it in a place between two rocks,
which place was never visited by any of
those who were with me. Even my cod-
piece was tattered. When the top end
used to become worn out, I would reverse
the cod-piece and use it with the bottom
end topmost. When going into the forest
27\n--- 第41页 ---\nTimeless in Time
28\n--- 第42页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Section III: Virupaksha Years
Virupaksha Years, 1899-1916 Hornets
The formless and imperishable Real stands re- In the initial years an attempt was made by the trustees
vealed in the Aruna Hill, the embodied Presence of the Virupaksha Math, who owned the cave, to levy a
of the three-eyed God. Since the Cave named small charge for the entry. Ramana did not want any kind
Virupaksha sustains the very devotees who dwell of interference with his accessibility. Hence he moved out
within the Heart-cave of that God, well may we of the cave to a level path of ground outside it and sat
call it Mother.1 under the shade of a tree there. When the agent tried
—Bhagavan Ramana to levy a fee there also, Ramana shifted to the nearby
Ramana stayed in the Virupaksha Cave for seventeen Sadguruswami cave for a short time. The trustees, realiz-
years from 1899 to 1916. Ramana was just a young lad of ing the inconvenience caused, stopped levying the fee so
twenty years when he shifted from Gurumurtam to the that Ramana could return to the Virupaksha Cave.
Virupaksha Cave. Ramana’s feelings towards this cave are An event while at this cave as narrated by Ramana is
expressed in the stray verse extracted above. He consid- fascinating. “In those days I used to go all by myself. For
ers it appropriate to call it “Mother” because it sustains answering calls of nature I used to stroll along taking no
the very devotees who give themselves wholly to the water with me, but going wherever water may be available.
Aruna Hill, the embodied form of
Lord Siva.
This cave is situated on the eastern
slopes of the Aruna Hill. It is a unique
cave, which has the shape of the mys-
tic syllable “Om.” It is named after
Virupaksha Deva, a saint who lived
and has been buried there in the 13th
century. Many momentous events in
Ramana’s life took place during the
years of his stay here. It was here that
his mother Azhagammal came to
live with him permanently in the last
years of her life. She surrendered her-
self totally to him and was guided by
him on the inward path. Her libera-
tion at the sacred hands of Ramana is
an epoch-making event.2
Another event of immense sig-
nificance is Ramana’s “first spoken
Virupaksha Cave
upadesa” to a disciple, which was
given to Ganapati Muni in 1907.3 Till then Ramana had It was on one such occasion, on one morning, that I came
remained silent outwardly as well. across the banyan tree of which I have spoken often.
It was again at Virupaksha that Ramana commu- “As I was walking on the bed of a hill stream, I saw a
nicated the experience of his enlightenment through big banyan tree on a boulder, with big leaves. And crossing
his spiritual instructions to Gambhiram Seshier and the stream, I wanted to get to the other bank and view
Sivaprakasam Pillai.4 from there this big tree. When I accidentally put my left
In writing about the Virupaksha years of Ramana, foot near a bush on the way to the other bank, so that the
one might say that it is not a biographer’s account but hornets clustered round my left leg up to the knee and
almost an autobiographical account by Ramana himself. started stinging it. They never did anything to my right leg.
29\n--- 第43页 ---\nTimeless in Time
I left the leg there for some time, so that the hornets could him today. In case they do, have this paper and pencil
inflict full punishment on the leg which had encroached with you so that the same may be recorded.’ Bhagavan
on their domain. After a time, the hornets withdrew and actually composed the first six stanzas of the Arunachala
I walked on. The leg got swollen very much and I walked Ashtakam (Eight Verses on Arunachala). It seems
with difficulty and reached ‘Ezhu Sunai’ (Seven Springs) Echamma first got “The Marital Garland of Letters” pub-
about 2 a.m. lished. Narayana Reddi came to know of the Padikam
“Jadaswami, who was camping there then, gave me and Ashtakam soon afterwards and wanted to publish
some buttermilk mixed with jaggery, which was all that them. Then Bhagavan composed two more stanzas for
he could provide by way of food. This is what actually hap- completing the Ashtakam and the Decad (Padikam) and
pened. But afterwards, people have gone and written that Eight Verses (Ashtakam) were published by Narayana
I had purposely set out to explore and find the banyan tree Reddi. This is how the Padikam and Ashtakam in the Five
described in the purana as the one on the northern peak Hymns on Arunachala came to be composed.”7
of the Hill, where Arunachala is said to be residing as a The most famous of Ramana’s Five Hymns on
siddha. I never had any such idea. When I saw for the first Arunachala is “The Marital Garland of Letters” with the
time a remarkable banyan tree on a huge and precipitous refrain Arunachala Siva. This was also mostly composed
boulder, I was prompted by curiosity to have a look at it. during Ramana’s circuits of Arunachala. The story of the
Meanwhile, the hornets stung me and I forgot all about the need for composing these 108 verses has been mentioned
tree.”5 The last words, “I forgot all about the tree,” show by Ramana. In order to feed Ramana and the fellow dev-
Ramana’s sense of humor. otees at the Virupaksha Cave it became necessary to beg
Ramana also composed a stray verse on this incident, for alms in the streets of Tiruvannamalai. Palaniswami
which is extracted below: wanted Ramana to compose a new devotional hymn so
that Ramana’s group may be identified by the people of
Apology to Hornets
the town. After it was composed a party of four led by
When I was stung by hornets in revenge Palaniswami would start out to town, blow a long blast on
Upon the leg until it was inflamed, their conches, and start chanting “The Marital Garland of
Although it was by chance I stepped upon Letters.” This was an announcement to the town’s people
Their nest, constructed in a leafy bush, that Bhagavan’s party had left the cave on their begging
What kind of mind is his if he does not mission. The party would give another blast when they
At least repent for doing such a wrong?6 reached the foot of the hill. A third call would be sound-
ed at the entrance of the street. All the residents of the
Composition of the Five Hymns street would be ready with their offerings and the party
would march along the street singing and some collect-
ing the offerings. The food collected was ample, it seems,
We have an account of how the Decad on Arunachala
for all who gathered near Bhagavan and even all of the
and Eight Verses on Arunachala came to be composed by
Ramana spontaneously. monkeys etc. “The Marital Garland of Letters” was spe-
“One morning, when he was sitting on the verandah cially composed for use by the begging party. Bhagavan
in Virupaksha Cave, the words ‘Karunaiyal Ennai’ came humorously added, “‘Marital Garland of Letters’ fed us
to him very insistently, but he took no special notice of for many years.”8
them. It seems the same thing happened the following
Ramana with Children
morning also. Then Bhagavan composed the first stanza
of The Decad on Arunachala. The next morning the words
beginning the second stanza similarly came to him and Even though Ramana remained silent in the first years
he composed the second stanza; and so the thing went on of stay at Virupaksha Cave, many children would climb
every day, till the last two stanzas were composed on one up to the cave and sit for long periods just to be in his
day. On that day, after composing the two last stanzas, presence. After 1907, sometimes Ramana would join
Bhagavan, it seems, started for giripradakshina (going the children in their play. He played marbles with them
round the hill). One of his disciples, Aiyaswami, brought and referred to this later as follows: “The holes dug for
a piece of paper and pencil and told another disciple who the purpose must be there even now. Those children some-
was going with Bhagavan, ‘Bhagavan has been compos- times used to bring packets of sweetmeats and we all used
ing one stanza every morning for some days now, and to share them. During Deepavali they used to put aside my
today he has composed two stanzas. More may come to share of the crackers and bring them up to me. We used to
fire the crackers together.”9
3300\n--- 第44页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Ramana has also narrated how two children were about 8 or 10 years old, met Bhagavan another day at
emotionally moved when he was about twenty-two and Virupaksha Cave. He took such pity on Bhagavan that
living in the Virupaksha Cave. It seems he was sitting on the following conversation took place between them.
a rock near the cave and a boy about 8 or 10 came there, Bhagavan was sitting on a rock near the cave, all alone,
looked at Bhagavan and, not being able to bear the sight and the boy met him there.
of such a young and bright person taking to such a hard Boy: Why are you here all alone, like this?
life of penance, was so moved by compassion that he Bhagavan: I had some trouble at home and so have
started to sob and sobbed violently for some time. come away like this.
Bhagavan said, “Who could say what was the reason Boy: Th en how about your food?
for his sobbing and why tears fl owed out of him merely Bhagavan: I eat if anybody gives me anything to eat.
at his seeing me?” Bhagavan continued in a reminiscent Boy: I have a good master. I shall take you to him.
mood later in the day and added that another boy, also First, you may have to volunteer your services free. If he
approves of your work, he
will give three pies a day and
gradually increase it to six
pies, and so on.
Bhagavan added, “Th ere
was no doubt that the boy was
very much concerned over
what he considered my sad
plight and that he was moved
by great and genuine pity.”10
Some Other
Incidents
One day Ramana was doing
a small masonry job when
some visitors came up in
order to see the Swami. He
told them, “Swami has gone
out.” When they were return-
ing down the hill, they met
Echamma who told them
that the person whom they
had met was none other than
the Swami. She later asked
Ramana why he had misled
the men, to which Ramana
replied, “Do you want me to
go about with a bell around
my neck announcing ‘I am
the Swami’ or to have a label
on my forehead that ‘I am the
Swami’?”11
In 1912, a group of dev-
otees headed by Vasudeva
Sastri, wished to celebrate
Ramana’s birthday for the
fi rst time. Ramana opposed
it saying that the true birth
is only when one becomes
31\n--- 第45页 ---\nTimeless in Time
The inside of the Virupaksha Cave as it is today
Self-aware. But Vasudeva Sastri pleaded with him say- her that she could do so in the cave nearby. She agreed and
ing, “It is for our sake and Bhagavan should not object.”12 started cooking. She said to me, ‘Venkatarama, I am cook-
Thus they celebrated it that year for the first time. Since ing today. You should not take any other food!’ I said yes,
then the celebration known as jayanti has been a very but after she left, I ate with the others as usual. When she
important occasion for all the disciples and devotees of had cooked, I ate that food also.”13
Ramana. Once Ramana’s grandmother came to see him. An old relative of Ramana’s known for his abusive
This is Ramana’s account of it. “She came while we were tongue came along. He was really a good-natured man
there and said that she would cook food for herself. We told and meant no ill to anybody. Soon after he came, he
asked jocularly, “What Venkataraman, it
seems you have become a big Swami! Have
you grown horns on your head?”14
While at Virupaksha, Ramana also
wrote in prose a Tamil translation of Vive-
kacudamani, a sacred scripture composed
by Adi Sankara. Right from Gurumurtam
days, Palaniswami used to bring Ramana
spiritual books from the library in the town.
At Virupaksha also he continued to do so.
Thus Ramana became more and more ac-
quainted with the sacred lore of Vedanta.
In his early years in Virupaksha Cave, he
would occasionally visit Padmanabha Swa-
mi, popularly called Jatai Swami because
of his matted hair. The Swami had several
Sanskrit books through some of which Ra-
mana would glance, and remember all that
he had read. We have already seen that even
Samadhi of Virupaksha Deva
3322\n--- 第46页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
as a boy at school he was remarkable for his prodigious hill and the other down. When I came out of the cave
memory. A scholar once came to the cave and left a copy and asked, ‘Swamiji, weren’t you afraid when the two ani-
of Sankaracharya’s Vivekacudamani, a metrical manual of mals were playing so close to you?’ Bhagavan said with a
Vedanta, which expounds the truth of Advaita in a clear smile, ‘Why have fear? I knew as I saw them that, after a
and comprehensive manner. Ramana read it and also a while, one of them would go up the hill and the other down.
metrical Tamil version produced by Palaniswami. Then And they did. If we get frightened and say, “Oh! A tiger!”
it occurred to him that a prose translation would be very They will also get frightened and say, “Oh! A man!” and
useful for aspirants who did not know Sanskrit, so he will rush forward to kill us. If we do not have fear, they too
undertook the translation which came to be printed and will not have any fear, and will then move about freely and
published under the following circumstances. “Uddandi peacefully.’” In spite of all that Bhagavan had said, Sastry
Nayanar, who was the first regular devotee to be attached added, “My fear never left me.”16
to Ramana, was called Ramana would
away in 1897 to the never take anything
headquarters of the as- without sharing it
cetic order to which he with all those present.
belonged. Seven years As a result often
later, he returned with there would not be
a hundred rupees as his enough food to go
offering. The Master re- around. Ramana has
fused to accept it, since narrated what used to
he had no use for money happen. “When I was
and would not touch it. in Virupaksha Cave,
Nayanar left the money Sundaresa Iyer used
with a devotee asking to go out into the town
him to utilize it for any for bhiksa and bring
good cause of which us food. At times, there
the Master approved. It used to be no curry
was spent on printing or chutney. People to
the translation of the eat were many while
Vivekacudamani.”15 the food obtained was
In those years limited. What were we
there used to be ti- to do? I used to mix it
gers and leopards on into a paste and pour
Arunachala. Ramana hot water over it to
had no fear because the make it like gruel, and
sign of a jnani is desire- then give a glassful
lessness and fearless- to each and take one
ness. Hence the wild myself. Sometimes we
animals would not all used to feel that it
be frightened of him. would be better if we
An interesting incident is recorded by Vasudeva Sastri. had at least some salt to mix with it. But where was money
“In the broad daylight Swamiji and I were seated on the to buy salt? We should have had to ask someone for it. If
rock outside the cave. In the valley below, a tiger and a once we began to ask for salt, we would feel like asking for
leopard were playing with each other and Bhagavan was dhal, and when we ask for dhal, we would feel like asking
smiling as he watched the friendly movements of the two for payasam, and so on. So we felt that we should not ask
animals. I was however in a terrible fright and requested for anything, and swallowed the gruel as it was. We used
Bhagavan to come into the cave. He was adamant and sat to feel extremely happy over such a diet. As the food was
there motionless. As for myself, I sought the shelter of the sattvic, without spices of any kind, and there was not even
cave. The two animals played about for a while, looked at salt in it, not only was it healthy for this body, but there was
Swamiji in the same way pets do, and without any fear or also great peace for the mind.”17
N
expression of anger went their own way, one going up the
33\n--- 第47页 ---\nTimeless in Time
was the regular death-like hue and it got
darker and darker. Vasudeva Sastri took
me in fact to be dead, held me in his em-
brace and began to weep aloud and la-
ment my death. His body was shivering. I
could at that time distinctly feel his clasp
and his shivering, hear his lamentation,
and understand the meaning. I also saw
the discoloration of my skin and I felt the
stoppage of my heartbeat and respira-
tion, and the increased chilliness of the
extremities of my body. Yet my usual
current was continuing without a break
in that state also. I was not afraid in the
least, nor felt any sadness at the condi-
tion of my body. I had closed my eyes
as soon I sat near the rock in my usual
The entrance to Virupaksha Cave posture but was not leaning against it.
The body which had no circulation nor respiration main-
tained that position still. This state continued for some ten
The Most Significant Event After
or fifteen minutes. Then a shock passed suddenly through
Enlightenment the body, circulation revived with enormous force, as also
respiration; and there was perspiration all over the body at
The first biographer, B.V. Narasimha Swami, had inter- every pore. The color of life reappeared on the skin. I then
viewed Ramana about an incident which happened in opened my eyes, got up and said, ‘Let us go.’ We reached
1912 while he was staying at the Virupaksha Cave. This Virupaksha Cave without further trouble. That was the
interview is given as an appendix to Narasimha Swami’s only occasion on which both my blood circulation and res-
biography under the heading, “A strange and remarkable piration stopped.”2
incident in the life of Sri Maharshi.”1 The significance of At the time of enlightenment, which happened
this event is therefore likely to be lost sight of. on July 17, 1896, Ramana had only the sudden fear of
In 1912, Ramana, Palaniswami, and Vasudeva Sastri, death. However, in order to go through the experience
and a few others went from Virupaksha Cave to Pachiam- of what death means, “he stretched himself like a corpse
man Koil for taking an oil bath as facilities for such a bath as though rigor mortis had set in and held his lips tightly
were available in plenty in that place. After bathing they together and his breath.” It was not a physical death but
returned cutting a path across the hill for themselves. an experience of death intensely felt as part of investiga-
The sun was fairly hot even at about 10 a.m. when they tion to find out and discover “Who am I? Still I felt within
reached the tortoise rock. Ramana began to feel faint and myself the ‘I’ was there, the sound was there, the feeling
what happened is best stated in his own words. “Suddenly itself ‘I’ was there. What was that? I felt that it was a force
the view of natural scenery in front of me disappeared and or current, a center of energy playing on the body working
a bright white curtain was drawn across the line of my vi- on despite the rigidity or activity of the body though exist-
sion and shut out the view of nature. I could distinctly see ing in connection with it.”3 This experience that the true
the gradual process. At one stage I could see a part of the “I” was a current or a force or center that constituted the
prospect of nature yet clear, and the rest was being cov- real “I” stayed with him for the rest of life.
ered by the advancing curtain. It was just like drawing a The second experience is different in that there was
slide across one’s view in the stereoscope. On experiencing a physical death for 10 or 15 minutes. The heart beat and
this I stopped walking lest I should fall. When it cleared, I the blood circulation had stopped and the body had be-
walked on. When darkness and faintness overtook me a come cold and blue. But the experience of awareness of
second time, I leaned against a rock until it cleared. And the heart current as the “I” remained. This is the most
again for the third time I felt it safest to sit, so I sat near the significant aspect of this experience. Even while narrat-
rock. Then the bright white curtain had completely shut out ing the experience Ramana has clearly stated, “Yet my
my vision, my head was swimming, and my blood circula- usual current was continuing as usual without a break in
tion and breathing stopped. The skin turned a livid blue. It that state also.”
3344\n--- 第48页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Ramana himself has referred to this incident in the from the Heart to the left chest and re-establish life in the
course of his conversation with B.V. Narasimha Swami, body.”4
years later, in 1937. The relevant portion reads as follows: One shudders at the thought as to what would have
“I used to feel the vibrations of the Heart, which resemble happened if the life force had not re-established itself in
those of a dynamo, even in school. When I developed rigor Ramana’s body.
mortis many years ago in Tiruvannamalai, every object But then it had to happen only in that way in the di-
and sensation disappeared, except these vibrations. It was vine scheme of things. One who is aware of the life of
as if a dark screen was drawn before my eyes and shut the Ramana will also be aware that the earmarked role for
world completely from me, but of course I was all along Ramana in the divine scheme was to guide seekers of
conscious of the Self, with a vague feeling that someone was truth, as the inner and outer guru, on the direct path of
crying near me. This state continued till just before I re- self-enquiry for Self-knowledge. This role as the sadguru
gained physical consciousness, when I felt something rush was to be for about another five decades in the body from
35\n--- 第49页 ---\nTimeless in Time
the date of this experience. Ramana’s steady Self-aware- Sage Gautama—Skanda Purana
ness and accessibility ensured this.
N The Skanda Purana, III, proclaims in unqualified terms
the glory of Arunachala. This is set out in different ways,
through the words of Sage Suta, from the lips of great
Gautama Muni, and through Nandikeswara (the divine
Arunachala
bull of Lord Siva).
In the days of yore a dispute arose between the
The Ancient Legends
Creator, Lord Brahma, and the Preserver, Lord Vishnu, as
to which of them was superior. Each claimed superiority
“Although he had a luster on a par with hundreds over the other based upon their respective functions. In
and crores of midday suns and rising world destruc- their ego-ridden state they forgot their own true nature
tive fires, he became approachable to living beings (as which was the auspicious state of Self-abidance bestowed
Arunachala).”1
on them by Lord Siva. Out of compassion Lord Siva, the
great Yogi, decided to appear before them as a column
“I can rarely be seen in Kailasa, peak Meru, or in my abodes of light. He appeared as a blazing fire which enveloped
in various Kula mountains. I myself am Arunachala. On the universe and which appeared to have no beginning or
seeing the peak, all the sins of the people will be destroyed end. A celestial voice in the sky said, “Why are you fight-
and their eye of wisdom would be opened by vision born ing your nature? Siva will himself decide. Therefore he
of Knowledge.”2 stands before you as a fiery column. Whoever will be able
36\n--- 第50页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
to see the beginning or the end is superior in strength.” vised her through an ethereal voice to go to Arunachala
This was in the Tamil month of Margazhi, on the Ardra and continue her tapas. Siva also asked her to become
Darsana day sacred to all the devotees of Siva, sacred too aware of the glory of Arunachala from Gautama Muni
as Ramana’s day of birth. before embarking on her tapas. Gautama humbly nar-
Thereupon Lord Vishnu took the form of a boar and rated to her the incomparable and matchless wonder of
went farther and farther down the bowels of the earth Siva standing as a hill Arunachala. Gautama said: “All the
tearing layer after layer. Soon he was overcome with fa- Vedas eulogize you, the body of Siva thus: This one who
tigue and realized the futility of his quest. In despera- is copper colored or reddish brown or tawny-colored is
tion he prayed to Lord Siva who restored his strength by highly auspicious.” “Obeisance to the copper-colored
making him lose false pride. Lord Brahma flew high in pink Siva, the supreme Lord whose form can be compre-
the sky as a swan. Despite being enfeebled and dispirited hended through the Vedas, who is accompanied by Uma
his mind did not accept the impossibility of success in and whose form is happiness.”3
his quest. However, ultimately he too became crestfallen Continuing in this strain Gautama says, “The entire
and reported his failure to Lord Siva. They realized that greatness of Arunachala cannot be expressed by a crore
their true strength was Lord Siva, the supreme Yogi. They of mouths.” Gautama also elaborated at length the virtues
eulogized him and prayed to him to take the form of a of going round Arunachala emphasizing that all worldly
linga by name Arunachala, in order to bless the world. desires and also Self-knowledge would result from such
They pleaded that if they themselves could not bear the circumambulation.4
effulgence it would be impossible for the ordinary mor- The third aspect is the story of mother Gauri’s tapas
tals to worship Siva in that form. Out of his love for the at Arunachala with full awareness of Arunachala’s glory
world Siva manifested himself as Arunachala. The de- and its redeeming radiance. The demonical forces head-
lighted Gods proclaimed that whoever circumambulated ed by Mahishasura tried to destroy her tapas. They were
Arunachala slowly and in reverence, singly or in groups, defeated because no one could match her fiery power
singing and dancing the Lord’s praise would be blessed in with her constant penance and incomparable power
every way by Lord Siva, the perpetual granter of boons. of Arunachala. The auspicious Lord Siva was pleased
The second story relates to the penance of Goddess with her tapas and appeared before her in the month of
Parvati at Arunachala and her reunion with Lord Siva. Kartika on the day when the constellation of Krittika ap-
Once Goddess Parvati playfully closed the eyes of Lord pears which is the star pertaining to the holy fire, Agni.
Siva as a result of which the whole universe was plunged Then Gauri, the mother of the universe, bowed down to
in darkness, for the eyes of Siva are the Light of the uni- Siva and prayed that they should never again be separat-
verse. This caused untimely destruction even though the ed. For she had suffered the pangs of separation enough
closure of Siva’s eyes was only for a few seconds. Hence, from her long spells of penance in three sacred places,
Parvati was asked to do penance in the world and bless Kasi, Kanchi, and Arunachala. She told her Lord that she
it. Her tapas was sure to ennoble the world. Her penance should never be abandoned whatever offence she may
was first done at Kasi, then at Kanchi and there Siva ad- be guilty of. Such was her compassionate heart, she also
37\n--- 第51页 ---\nTimeless in Time
prayed that the knowing and unknowing offences com- temple authorities had wielded over this area had arisen
mitted by devotees should be excused by Siva through a because of the local tradition that the hill was Siva him-
single glance. Further she prayed that he should be seen self manifest in the form of a linga. Since the belief was
in the world in the pleasing form of Arunachala. Siva widespread and largely unchallenged, the local people
readily granted the boons asked for by her. He gave the felt that it was natural and correct that the main temple
left half of his physical body to her so that once and for in Tiruvannamalai should administer all affairs pertain-
all the question of separation ended. The gods and god- ing to the hill.
desses, sages and the whole world, rejoiced in the union “The traditional arrangement was challenged by
which was for universal welfare. the Government of India in 1934. In May that year
In this context one needs to refer to Ramana’s depo- the Government issued a notification in the district
sition on Arunachala in 1938, on a commission from a gazette which stated that the whole of Arunachala
court. It contains several authoritative pronouncements was a reserve forest and was thus the property of the
about the sacredness of the hill which is being regarded Government of India. The temple authorities challenged
as the embodiment of Lord Siva. Ramana gave evidence the Government’s order in the court, maintaining that
the temple was the legitimate owner of 1,750
acres on the eastern side of the hill. This area
included all the tanks and temples on the slope
of the mountain which begins at the back of the
Arunachaleswara temple.
“One of the temple trustees approached
Bhagavan and requested him to give evi-
dence in the court which would support the
Arunachaleswara temple’s claim to the land.
Bhagavan agreed and in 1938 lawyers for the
plaintiff and the defendant came to the asram
to hear this evidence and to cross-examine him
on it. Bhagavan’s initial evidence took the form
of a written deposition. A small part of this de-
position was recorded in Talks with Sri Ramana
Maharshi. Talk No. 492.”5
In the course of his evidence Ramana went
on to describe why in his opinion the temple
authorities were allowed to administer affairs
pertaining to the hill. “There is an aitikya (tradi-
tion) that this hill is linga swarupa, that is to say,
that this hill itself is God. This aitikya is not to
be found anywhere else. That is the cause of the
glory of this place. The tradition of this place is
that this hill is the form of God and that in its real
The cauldron carried to the summit of Arunachala during the Deepam festival nature it is full of light. Every year the Deepam
festival celebrates the real nature of the mountain
on behalf of the Arunachaleswara temple authorities in a as light itself. Authority for this is found in the Vedas, the
dispute which arose between the temple authorities and Puranas, and in the stotras (poems) of devotees. Because
the Government of India. “Until the 1930s the eastern this tradition maintains that the hill is Siva swarupa, the
slope of the mountain of Arunachaleswara was adminis- practice of giripradakshina, walking clockwise around the
tered by the Arunachaleswara temple in Tiruvannamalai. mountain as an act of reverence or worship, has arisen. I
Prior to 1934, its right to do so had been accepted by also have faith in giripradakshina and have had experi-
everyone on and around the hill. From time immemo- ence of it.
rial the temple authorities had maintained the tanks and “In accordance with the tradition that the hill is Iswara
temples on the mountain, put out any fires which broke swarupa, the devasthanam performs abhishekam to the
out, and arranged for all the forest produce to be sold in top of the hill in the same way it would do to a linga. For
an orderly manner. The unquestioned authority that the the last ten to twelve years the cauldron which contains the
3388\n--- 第52页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Deepam light on the top of the hill is carried to the summit drew me to itself and I came near, I saw that it was stillness
every year during the festival. Prior to this, for many, many absolute.”11
years, the cauldron was left there throughout the year.”6 One of the sages who discovered this unique as-
In his deposition Ramana also refers to two composi- pect of Arunachala was the 16th century saint Guhai
tions of his: Namasivaya, who made Arunachala his home. There is a
cave on the hill, which is named after him. In some of his
Significance of Arunachala compositions on Arunachala, he recognizes this guru-
dom of Arunachala and gives expression to the fact that
The sudden rise of the blazing column of Annamalai
he regarded the hill as his guru.
in front of Brahma and Vishnu, and their utter
“Lord Arunagiri! Form of true knowledge! Guru to
distress at not being able to know the same, is sym-
whom I call out ‘Om Namasivaya’. Do not scorn me as
bolic of the sphurana of the heart center as the real
one who is devoid of love for you, who is a liar and with-
Self of the intellect and the ego.7
out self-respect, who is mentally immature and deficient
in intelligence, but take me to yourself and be my Lord!
Significance of the Beacon
“Taking into my heart as my Guru the Red Mountain
Getting rid of the “I am the body” idea and merging Lord (Arunachala) who now stands formless before me,
the mind into the heart to realize the Self as non- I put to flight the unutterable arrogance of my good and
dual being and the light of all, is the real signifi- evil deeds, my soul’s indissoluble threefold impurity, and
cance of darsan of the beacon light on Annamalai, my unparalleled accumulation of karma.”12
the center of the universe.8 It will be seen from the very first verse of this chap-
ter that Ramana puts very clearly in focus the fact that
Ramana’s Guru
“O Arunachala, you who stand and shine before
me in the form of my guru, destroy utterly my
faults, cure me and convert me, and as your ser-
vant govern me.”9
“Look at me! Think of me! Touch me! Make me
fit, ripen me! Then be my Master, govern me, O
Arunachula.”10
—Bhagavan Ramana
The power of Arunachala as the inner guru has been
felt by all seekers of truth from ages past. It has been
beckoning, magnetically, many such earnest persons
to itself. But it is only given to a few to regard the hill
as their guru and establish a disciple-guru relation-
ship with Arunachala. This is because one may be tak-
en in by the outer appearance of Arunachala as a hill
notwithstanding the legends coming down from the
days of Puranas. They would not be aware of its true
stature as the guru who silences the mind and helps
in discovering Self-knowledge. This is also expressed
by Ramana in one of his verses on Arunachala, the
inspired Eight Verses, the first of which reads as below.
“Look there it stands as if insentient. Mysterious is the
way it works, beyond all human understanding. From
my unthinking childhood the immensity of Arunachala
had shone in my awareness. But even when I learnt
from someone that it was only Tiruvannamalai, I did
not realize its meaning. When it stilled my mind and
39\n--- 第53页 ---\nTimeless in Time
the hill Arunachala shines as guru. Here it must be men-
tioned that there is a contemporary notion that the guru
should be in human form. Based on this belief people
would think that Ramana had no guru. This is a miscon-
ception. Ramana has made it clear not only in his Five
Hymns on Arunachala but also in his conversations that
he regarded Arunachala as his guru.
There is a conversation which took place between
him and Dilip Kumar Roy of Sri Aurobindo Ashram in
the late forties, which reads as below:
D: Some people report that Maharshi denies the need
of a guru. Others say the reverse. What does Maharshi
say?
B: I have never said that there is no need for a guru.
D: Sri Aurobindo often refers to you as having had
no guru.
B: That depends on what you call guru. He need not
necessarily be in the human form. Dattatreya had twenty-
four gurus—the elements. etc. That means that every form
in the world was his guru. A guru is absolutely necessary.
The Upanishads say that none but a guru can take a man
out of the jungle of mental and sense perceptions, so there
must be a guru.
D: I mean a human guru. The Maharshi didn’t have
one.
B: I might have had sometime or other. And didn’t I
sing hymns on Arunachala? What is a guru? Guru is God
or the Self. First a man prays to God to fulfill his desires,
then a time comes when he does not pray for the fulfillment
of a desire but for God himself. So God appears to him in
some form or other, human or non-human, to guide as
guru in answer to his prayer.13
4400\n--- 第54页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Some believe that it is the same red hill which took mal’s son for a while was now restored to its original status
the human form of Ramana, in order that those who are as immutable Self. There was therefore no parting from
not aware of the true nature of it as Arunachala may rec- Arunachala.”15 This was said in the context of mother’s
ognize it in the human form of Ramana. He himself has pleading, requesting Ramana to come back home where
referred to this in one of his verses in the “Necklet of Nine he could perform his penance undisturbed. How could
Gems.” “In Tiruchuzhi, the holy town of Bhuminatha, I he return? For his guru Arunachala had commanded him
was born to Sundara and his good wife Sundari. To rescue to come to be in His physical presence.
me from this barren worldly life, Arunachala Siva in the
form of a Hill famous throughout the universe, gave me Giripradakshina
His own state of bliss, so that His heart might rejoice, so
that His own being as Awareness might shine forth, and The ancient legend about the sacredness of Arunachala
His own Power might flourish.”14 has been coming down through the ages to the devout
It is the purpose of the guru to bestow by his grace public. Going round the hill, which is considered to be
his own state of fullness of consciousness on the disciple. the embodiment of the auspicious Lord Siva, is consid-
The guru’s greatest happiness is in his disciple becoming ered to be very holy and beneficial not only spiritually
Self-aware like himself. One might add that there are in- but also materially. As a result pious crowds keep moving
numerable persons so redeemed, so blessed by Ramana around Arunachala from the early morning to past mid-
in his role as universal guru. night, particularly on days considered to be sacred.
It may be for this reason that Ramana stayed per- The circuit is eight miles or thirteen kilometers long
forming his role as universal guru at various caves of and one keeps the hill on the right side during the cir-
Arunachala and on its southern slopes. T.M.P. Mahade- cuit. A number of bathing places, temples, and places of
van refers to this in his book Ramana Maharshi. “This rest are scattered around this entire circuit. It is therefore
Rock of Ages which chose to assume the role of Azhagam- recommended that this journey should be done slowly
One of the temples on the circuit around Arunachala
41\n--- 第55页 ---\nTimeless in Time
with constant remembrance of the holiness of the hill. decreases. Once a person is accustomed to the happiness of
The circuit should be performed “as slowly as the gait of the pradakshina, he can never give it up.”17
a princess in the tenth month of her pregnancy.”16 Ramana B.V. Narasimha Swami gives a very fine description
would recommend that one should keep to the left since of the pradakshina with Ramana. “When Maharshi starts
the path on the right side is reserved for siddhas or those the entire asram starts with him, as everyone is eager to
who have already attained realization but are in astral accompany him. Sometimes they start at nightfall after
bodies. the meal and return just at dawn. Sometimes they start
in the morning and take a day or two to return.
One may wonder why so many hours or days
are required to walk eight miles, which could
be done in three hours. But Maharshi goes on
these circuits mainly to set an example to and
benefit others. Again Maharshi often moves in
a state of samadhi: such an intense ecstasy im-
plies slow and even breath and absence of haste
or exertion. So he moves at the rate of one mile
per hour, and rests for some fifteen minutes or
so in suitable places which are available at ev-
ery mile or even half-mile. While engaged in
this circuit he enjoys the bliss of the Atman and
cares not for the sounds and sights. He is in
the Universal center, in the only Reality, in the
Being of beings.”18
Those accompanying Ramana would be in
a mood of fervent devotion because of Ramana
whom they considered to be Lord Siva himself.
There would be a joyous sense of detachment,
sometimes rising to the heights of ecstasy.
“Some address themselves to Lord
Arunachala and according to their varying
moods praise and dance or pray and weep.
One Gajanana, who stayed for some months
with the Maharshi, was full of fervent faith in
Sri Hari (Lord Vishnu). He would constantly
sing songs from Srimad Bhagavata and would
Ramana himself used to go around the hill with his
disciples regularly from 1900 to 1926. He recalls: “It used
to be very exciting when we were going for pradakshina.
We started whenever we felt like it and especially on a fes-
tival day we used to halt whenever we felt it was late or we
were tired, cook for ourselves and eat. There was no anxiety
whatsoever as there was no need to stop at any particular
place. The state of concentration (dhyana) that you can-
not enter while sitting, you get into automatically if you go
for pradakshina. The place and the atmosphere there are
like that. However unable a person is to walk, if he once
goes round the hill he feels like doing so again and again.
The more you go, the more the enthusiasm for it. It never
4422\n--- 第56页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
them which created such an impression. They asked
Bhagavan to direct them to some place where they
could find water. As there was no water nearby, he
took them some distance. He was then about to pro-
ceed on his pradakshina but one of the women asked
him to be so kind as to partake a little of the food
they were going to eat before leaving them. Bhagavan
did not like to seem rude, so he consented. But what
was his surprise when, after one woman had untied
her bundle and given him some food out of it, each
of the others also opened her bundle and said: ‘You
must take a little of mine also.’ Bhagavan was placed
in such a delicate situation that he had to take some-
thing from each in order not to hurt any of them,
with the result that he ate much more than he had
bargained for.
“After this, he left them and continued on his
way round the hill. But after he had gone some miles
(Bhagavan used to walk round very slowly, some-
times taking even a whole day, and stopping here and
there on the way), about midday the same women
again met him. Bhagavan was surprised to see that
they had not yet gathered any fuel or leaves in their
dance in his joy most of the way round
the hill. Others poured forth their soul
in Sanskrit, Tamil, Sivanandalahari,
Tevaram, Tiruppugazh, Aksharamana-
malai etc., aided by cymbals, tambura,
drum (mridangam), and fiddle.
“The last, but by no means the least,
pilgrim is the one who goes on repeat-
ing silently the dear Lord’s name (such
as the Panchaksari) and by dint of med-
itation becomes himself the object of
his own ‘thought.’ Then really thought
is not. In enjoyment it expires.”19
Another incident connected with
pradakshina with Bhagavan mentioned
by Ramana himself has been recorded
by Devaraja Mudaliar. “One day when
Bhagavan was still at Skandasram, his
stomach was out of order. So he decided
to fast for the day. He thought that he
could do this more easily if he left the
asram on pradakshina. When he had
gone a furlong or two from where the
present asram stands he met five or six
women who looked like peasant wom-
en gathering fuel or leaves for making
leaf-plates. They had empty bags with
43\n--- 第57页 ---\nTimeless in Time
bags. He told us: ‘I thought in the morning they were wom- for Bhagavan with great care and devotion. He had got
en who had set out to collect leaves. But their bags were a big mango that day and thought that if he put it into
still empty.’ the rasam it would be both a very palatable and nour-
“They approached him and said: ‘We are now going ishing diet for Bhagavan. So he had made the rasam in
to have lunch. Swami must be graciously pleased to take this way and took it to Skandasramam. Learning there
something with us.’ that Bhagavan had gone on pradakshina he decided to
“So saying, each woman offered some food to go round the hill in the opposite direction (apradakshina
Bhagavan and he was obliged to eat it all. The matter did i.e., with his left hand to the hill) so that he could be sure
not end even here. When Bhagavan had proceeded fur- of meeting Bhagavan somewhere or other. He did in fact
ther on, he was met by Manavasi Ramaswami Iyer, one meet him at two in the afternoon, and when Bhagavan
of the oldest of his devotees, with food and a new kind heard of all the trouble he had taken he felt that he could
of pepper water (rasam) which he had specially prepared not possibly refuse to take the food thus prepared and
4444\n--- 第58页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
brought to him. Eventually he reached the asramam food for them whenever he came to know that the party
some time in the evening, after having had sumptuous was circumambulating. Noticing his absence on one of
food three times in the course of the day. the circuits Ramana took a detour and found him sitting,
“Bhagavan told us: ‘I thought I would go without food sadly, under a tree with a small pot in his hand. After
that day. But this is how it ended.’”20 much cajoling by Ramana the farmer hesitatingly in-
In his recollections Mudaliar also refers to some oth- formed him that he could get only a very small quantity
er incidents. On one occasion when Bhagavan was go- of cooked cold rice. How could he offer it?
ing round the hill he saw some luminous bodies moving Ramana exclaimed, “Oh! Cooked food is it? That is
round with him at about a man’s height from the ground. excellent. Why be ashamed? It will be very good, leave it
“On another occasion he went into the temple at Adi to me.” So saying he took a vessel available with the party,
Annamalai on the way round the hill and heard the Sama added proportionate water and lime juice and made a
Veda being chanted near the shrine. I asked whether those large quantity of the liquid and spiced it with ginger and
who accompanied him on those two occasions saw the salt. Then he took a glassful saying, “Oh! this is delicious!”
lights or heard the sounds, and he said, ‘No.’”21 It is widely Chatting freely with the farmer he took extra glasses and
believed that siddha Purushas (sages with su-
pernatural powers) live on Arunachala and
sometimes go round the hill. “Presumably
they must have been siddhas who took de-
light in accompanying Bhagavan.”22
Ramana would always encourage every-
one to go around the hill. Mudaliar had the
advantage of being totally free like a child
with Ramana. In the beginning he used to
question Ramana about the efficacy of the
pradakshina. Ramana told him, “For every-
body it is good to do pradakshina. It does not
matter if one has faith in the pradakshina
or not. Just as fire will burn on touching it,
whether they believe or not the hill will do
good to all those who go around it.”23
People who did pradakshina would
gradually, but invariably, feel the magnetic
pull of the hill. In the beginning they would
need company but slowly they would feel the
enchantment so strongly, they would with-
out any encouragement or stress voluntarily
go around the hill.
After 1926, Ramana did not himself go
around the hill. This was because the devo-
tees had swollen in numbers. It was difficult
for the residents around the hill to provide
food for his party. At the same time the dev-
otees did not wish to remain without offer-
ing their homage to Ramana. This was the
reason for his refraining from going around
the hill. However, he would recommend it to
everyone.
One of the most moving incidents dur-
ing the giripradakshina years was the be-
friending of a poor farmer. This farmer
would regularly wait for Ramana and his
party near Adi Annamalai temple with some
45\n--- 第59页 ---\nTimeless in Time
all of them, brought them to Sri
Ramanasramam, and handed
them over to Sadhu Natanan-
anda. These notes were later
published under the title Vichara
Sangraham, Self-Enquiry, both
in its essay format and question
and answer format.1 This note-
book is not available now. When
B.V. Narasimha Swami wrote his
biography, in 1930, the original
notebook was still available. Nar-
asimha Swami made his notes
from it for his intended publica-
tion to be titled Talks with Rama-
na Maharshi. Perhaps he wished
to cover the portion directly re-
lating to various extant spiritual
practices on which Ramana also
throws clear light.2
The value of Vichara San-
graham is that even though it is
not an exclusive Ramana Way
treatise, it was for the first time
after his Self-realization that Ra-
mana explained the royal path of
self-enquiry “Who am I” to any
told him that it was like nectar. He then gave the farmer a seeker. In this sense it is a very important document to
sufficient quantity to take home. “Wiping the tears of joy which one can refer for understanding the experience of
that were welling up in his eyes he took leave and went Ramana. The very invocation puts one on the trail of self-
off to his cottage.”24 enquiry. It reads thus: “Is there any way of adoring the
N
Supreme who is all, except by abiding firmly as That!”
The first three questions and answers indicate the direct
path and are extracted below:
Gambhiram Seshier Q: Master! What is the means to gain the state of
eternal bliss, ever devoid of misery?
To Gambhiram Seshier, also known as Gambhiram Ses- R: Apart from the statement in the Vedas that wher-
hayya, goes the credit of being the first person to system- ever there is a body there is misery (the idea that one is
atically question Ramana on various spiritual practices the body), this is also the direct experience of all people;
and elicit replies about them. He was a Municipal Office therefore, one should enquire into one’s true nature, which
Overseer at Tiruvannamalai in 1900 and began seeking is ever bodiless, and one should remain as such.
Ramana’s guidance from that time. He was a keen stu- Q: What is meant by saying that one should enquire
dent of Swami Vivekananda and had assiduously studied into one’s true nature and understand it?
his lectures on Raja Yoga and certain spiritual texts like R: Experiences such as “I went,” “I came,” “I was,” “I
Ramana Gita of the Yoga Vasishta. Ramana’s replies natu- did” come naturally to everyone. From these experiences,
rally covered some aspects of the subjects dealt with by does it not appear that the consciousness “I” is the subject
these books. At the same time he would invariably draw of those various acts? Enquiring into the true nature of that
the pointed attention of Seshier to the path of self-en- consciousness, and remaining as oneself is the way to un-
quiry. Fortunately for posterity Seshier noted down the derstand, through enquiry, one’s true nature.
questions and answers systematically in slips of paper Q: How is one to enquire, “Who am I?”
which he carefully preserved by pasting them in a note- R: Actions such as “going” and “coming” belong to the
book. After his death, his brother Krishna Iyer collected body. And so, when one says “I went,” “I came,” it amounts
4466\n--- 第60页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
to saying that the body is “I.” But, can the body be said to is that good? Can this be done? Or can that be done?’ One
be the consciousness “I”? This body was not there before should be rigid even before such thoughts arise and make
it was born, is made up of the five elements, is non-exis- the mind stay awake in the natural state. If any little room
tent in the state of deep sleep, and becomes a corpse when is given such a disturbed mind will do harm to us by posing
dead. Can this body, which is inert like a log of wood, be as our friend. Like a foe appearing to be a friend it will top-
said to shine as “I-I”? Therefore, the “I”-consciousness, ple us down.”4 The important point made here is that self-
which at first arises in respect of the body, is referred to enquiry, attention, has to be from the beginning of the
variously as self-conceit (tarbodham), and as individual birth of thought and before its proliferation. Otherwise,
soul (jiva). Can we remain without enquiring into this? Is if entry is allowed for one “favored” thought, many “unfa-
it not for our redemption through enquiry into this that all vored” thoughts will also make their entry and crowd the
the scriptures declare that the destruction of “self-conceit” mind. It will consequently be distracted and divided.
is release (mukti)? Therefore, making the corpse-body re- Gambhiram Seshier is one of the devotees who has
main as a corpse and not even uttering the word “I,” one not received due credit for this valuable contribution
should enquire keenly thus: “Now, what is it that rises as which he has made through his question and answer ses-
‘I’?” Then, there would shine in the Heart a kind of word- sions with Ramana spread over three years in the early
less illumination of the form “I-I.” That is there and would part of the century. He had also taken the necessary care
shine of its own accord. The pure consciousness is unlim- to preserve the dialogues safely. Anyone who reads the
ited and one. When the limited, with the many thoughts, question answer form of Self-Enquiry (Vichara Sangraha)
has disappeared it would be experienced. If one remains would realize that this dialogue between the disciple
quiescent without abandoning that (experience), the ego- Gambhiram Seshier and sadguru Ramana holds a special
ity, the individual sense of the form “I am the body,” will place in Ramana literature.
be totally destroyed and at the end the final thought, viz, N
the “I”-form also will be quenched like the fire that burns
camphor. The great sages and scriptures declare that this
alone is release.3
In this work we also find very
valuable information and insights
into the essential nature of mind as
a reflection of consciousness. In re-
sponse to the question whether Self-
experience is possible to the mind
Ramana clearly points out that “the
nature of the mind is pure and unde-
filed like ether. When it stays in that
natural pure state, it has not even the
name mind. By erroneous knowledge
one mistakes another entity and calls it
the mind.” When the mind is rid of its
accretions in the form of tendencies,
it once again reflects its pure nature
as consciousness. Another impor-
tant aspect covered in Gambhiram
Seshier’s questions and Ramana’s an-
swers is that activity does not disturb
the mental peace. One more crucial
point made is that one should not
examine the contents of the mind or
the individual thought or thoughts
separately since all thoughts are ob-
structive of the awareness of the Self.
“One should not give room in the mind
for such thoughts as ‘Is this good? Or
47\n--- 第61页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Sivaprakasam Pillai Guhai Namasivayar temple where Ramana was staying
at that time. Immediately he asked the question which
The best known prose work of Ramana is “Nan Yar?”, was uppermost in his mind, “Who am I?” Little did he
“Who am ‘I’?” It has a unique position since the path of realize that he was asking the most fundamental question
self-enquiry has been stated in it by Ramana himself with around which the teachings of Ramana revolve. In the
clarity. course of the next few days he put thirteen questions in
This message was first given in the year 1902 to all to Ramana. At that time since Ramana was maintain-
Sivaprakasam Pillai. Sivaprakasam Pillai was born in ing silence, he wrote his replies either on sand or with
August 1875 near the sacred town Chidambaram. Even chalk on a slate. The answer to the last question was im-
while at college, fundamental doubts like, “Who is this mediately copied out by Sivaprakasam Pillai. The other
I who whirls about in attachment to the body?” arose twelve questions and replies were written down by Pillai
spontaneously in his mind. After completing his degree from memory before the work was published, nearly two
he joined the Revenue Service in 1900, in the office of decades later in 1923. Some of the answers given to Pillai
the District Collectorate in South Arcot. In the course form a part of Pillai’s book Anugraha Ahaval, “The Story
of his official duties he visited Tiruvannamalai in 1902. of Grace” (lines 33-73). The poems in this book describe
There he heard of the saintly and ascetic life of a boy some of the experiences he had of Ramana’s grace. Later
residing on the hill who was then known as Brahmana in the year on the suggestion of some of his friends,
Swami. At once Sivaprakasam Pillai climbed up to the Pillai decided to write another book of poems titled Sri
Ramana Charitra Ahaval in which he narrates the story
of Bhagavan’s life. In that book the questions and answers
put by Pillai to Ramana in 1902 are printed as an appen-
dix under the title. “Nan Yar?”, “Who am ‘I’?”
As a consequence it would appear that Ramana him-
self decided to rewrite “Who am ‘I’?” in the form of an
essay. In his essay version Ramana had made changes
in the structure and content. As a result the essay ver-
sion could be regarded as an original work of Ramana.
Since Ramana himself wrote this essay version it imme-
diately superseded all the versions which were based on
the question-answer format.1 Some extracts from this
are given below wherein focus is clearly on the essential
teachings of Ramana: “Every living being longs always
to be happy, untainted by sorrow: and everyone has the
greatest love for himself, which is solely due to the fact that
happiness is his real nature. Hence, in order to realize that
inherent and untainted happiness, which indeed he daily
experiences, when the mind is subdued in deep sleep, it is
essential that he should know himself. For obtaining such
knowledge the enquiry ‘Who am “I”?’ in quest of the Self is
the best means.
“If the mind, which is the instrument of knowledge
and is the basis of all activity, subsides, the perception of
the world as an objective reality ceases. Unless the illusory
nature of the perception of the world as an objective reality
ceases, the vision of the true nature of the Self, on which the
illusion is formed, is not obtained.
“The mind is a unique power (sakti) in the Atman,
whereby thoughts occur to one. On scrutiny as to what re-
mains after eliminating all thoughts, it will be found that
there is no such thing as mind apart from thoughts. So
then, thoughts themselves constitute the mind. It is only
4488\n--- 第62页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
through the enquiry ‘Who am I?’ that the mind subsides weight, why indeed should we, the passengers traveling in
and one inheres in the Self.”2 it, carry our small individual articles of luggage on our laps
“Firm and disciplined inherence in Atman without to our great discomfort, instead of putting them aside and
giving the least scope for the rise of any thoughts other than sitting at perfect ease?”3
the deep contemplative thought of the Self, constitutes self- The main point focused on by Ramana is that happi-
surrender to the Supreme Lord. Let any amount of burden ness is inherent and common to all life. Such happiness
be laid on Him. He will bear it all. It is, in fact, the inde- is experienced by the mind which is abiding in its source,
finable power of the Lord that ordains, sustains, and con- in the spiritual heart. A mind which abides in the heart
trols everything that happens. Why then should we worry, is the Self itself. Such a mind is a pure mind. In contrast
tormented by vexatious thoughts, saying: ‘Shall we act this the mind as we know it is only a bundle of thoughts. If
way? No, that way,’ instead of meekly but happily submit- all thoughts are taken away, where is the mind? Of all
ting to that Power? Knowing that the train carries all the the thoughts the core thought is the “I”-thought. Self-
49\n--- 第63页 ---\nTimeless in Time
enquiry relates to this core “I.” When the attention is so district of Andhra Pradesh. His father was Narasimha
focused on this core without paying attention to the ris- Sastri and mother was Narasamamba. His parents had
ing thoughts the mind subsides in its source. The mind is three sons and Ganapati Muni was the middle one.
always aware of the bliss in the heart. He belonged to the lineage of the sage Koundinya. He
N later changed his name to Vasishta Ganapati because
Koundinyas are also known as Vasishtas.
Though Ganapati Muni was born in response to in-
Vasishta Ganapati Muni tense prayers of his parents for a special and exceptional
child, his childhood was a great disappointment. “He did
Vasishta Ganapati Muni was born on November 17, 1878. not articulate, disliked food, swooned often, and was af-
He belonged to a very respected family of brahmins who fected with some illness or the other. But suddenly at the
had settled down in the village of Kalavarayi in the Vizag age of six, a native treatment of branding with an iron
made him alright and his faculties began to shine. A new
life started to run in the veins of the child.”1
Ganapati was precocious and his memory was phe-
nomenal. He became well versed, in a few years, in the
intricacies of the sacred syllables (mantras), astrology,
and ayurveda.
In his twelfth year, Ganapati was married to
Visalakshi who was aged eight at that time. Visalakshi’s
earmarked role was to be a spiritual companion of the
Muni in his intense penance (tapas).
The lure of penance was so strong in Ganapati that
he secretly went with a couple of his friends to a quiet
place on the bank of the river Kaushiki near Rajamundry.
He was engaged in tapas for 45 days before he returned
home. On his 20th birthday, Ganapati took the blessings
of his father and started for Kasi (Varanasi) for another
round of tapas. This strong desire for tapas was there
throughout his life even after he became a disciple of
Ramana.
While staying at Kasi, with his skill in extempore
poetry, Ganapati attracted the attention of the learned
scholars there. They felt his stature was such that he
should be selected specially to participate in the grand
assembly of Sanskrit scholars which was being arranged
at Navadweepa, in Bengal. Since Ganapati was a poet of
the same caliber as the renowned Kalidasa, his success
at this assembly was foregone. He outmatched everyone
in his extempore poetry. He was unanimously awarded
the title “Kavayakantha,” “One in whose throat poetry
resides.”
All these might be said to be the backdrop of his
strenuous, single-minded, and continuous penance. The
fruition was to take place when he turned his attention
to the south and decided to come to Arunachala in the
beginning of this century. At Tiruvannamalai he com-
pleted 1000 verses in praise of Siva and titled the work
Harasahasra Slokavali. Unfortunately this great work
was lost due to the untimely demise of the disciple who
had taken it to make a fair copy.
Vasishta Ganapati Muni
5500\n--- 第64页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Ganapati Muni and Muruganar stand foremost passed his hand over the Muni’s head with great compas-
among the disciples of Ramana. When we think of sion. He advised him to anoint his head with castor oil
the Muni the image of the ancient rishis of India, like before his bath and almond oil after. That night the Muni
Vasishta, Atreva, and the like comes to our mind. He was experienced kapalabhedha. Throughout the Muni was
a ripe fruit of intense penance (tapasya). The mantra of surrendered to his Master and Ramana’s grace flowed
five sacred syllables, Namah Sivaya, was an ajapa, a con- uninterrupted.
tinuous remembrance which was always with him.
Ganapati Muni “had an air of charm and majesty Truth Revealed
about him. There was grace in his gait, sureness in his
speech. When he spoke, perhaps the gods came down Muni’s penchant for moving from one sacred place to an-
from on high and listened. His voice had an ethereal other for penance had become his second nature. And
magnificence which beckoned the soul of the listener.…
When the Muni initiated someone into a mantra, there
was no necessity for that person to carry on with the
japa. From the moment the initiation was done, the
voice of the Muni that articulated the mantra contin-
ued to reverberate ever afterwards in the heart of the
disciple.”2
All generations of Ramana’s disciples and devotees
must remain indebted to Muni because it was for his
sake and seeing his great spiritual hunger and ripeness
that Ramana broke his silence of eleven years and gave
the oral upadesa. This happened on the epoch-making
day, on November 18, 1907. Since then, the relation-
ship between Ramana and the Muni has been a model.
Ramana used to affectionately call him “Nayana,” which
has several shades of meaning in Telugu. It is a term of
endearment, it is a term by which one refers to one’s
father and to a disciple as well.
The Muni was always frank and childlike in his let-
ters to Ramana from Sirsi, which included his spiritual
problems. This has led to an opinion that the Muni was
not steadily Self-aware because he had sankalpas. The
mere existence of sankalpas does not negate the natural
state. Ramana’s view is that “a jnani is a most natural
person. He may have sankalpas but those sankalpas are
not binding in nature. They arise either because of pra-
rabdha or due to divine promptings. They do not bind a
person whose mind is dead.”3
Again one should not forget that in the immediate
presence of Ramana, while Ramana was staying in the
Virupaksha Cave and the Muni in the nearby Mango
Tree Cave, the Muni had the ultimate spiritual experi-
ence in the path of Sakti, worship of the divine Mother.
He had what is known as kapalabhedha. Prior to this
Muni was immersed in deep penance for many days.
All distinctions between inner and outer, between day
and night disappeared. Yet the Muni would somehow
visit Ramana once every day. One day the Muni felt as
though his head was pierced and a stream of bliss was
shooting from there. The Muni managed to go the next
day and report his condition to his sadguru. Ramana
51\n--- 第65页 ---\nTimeless in Time
though he was fully endowed with the power which flows Muni recognized at once that Ramana was “the foremost
from ceaseless penance, though he readily and easily at- of sages, lustrous on account of his greatness.”4
tracted followers, he had the clarity to recognize that The Muni was greatly attracted to Ramana even at
somehow his penance was incomplete. He had neither their very first meeting and could quite readily see his
the vision of his favorite God Siva, which he had longed glorious state. Yet, the divine time to recognize him as his
for, nor had he the peace of mind, which must follow own guru, as also the universal guru, had not come. The
from single-minded spiritual effort. Still with faith in his divine took a hand four years later in 1907, on an epoch-
penance and considering that Arunachala was the best making Monday, November 18, in the Tamil month of
place for it he came over there at the turn of the century. Kartigai.
At that time Ramana was known as Brahmana Swami The Kartigai festival was in progress. Hence the Muni
and was staying in the Virupaksha Cave, observing si- came to the town to attend it. After the morning festival,
lence. In 1903, on the suggestion of Viswanatha Iyer, the as he was a little tired, he did not return to his place of
Muni went with him for Ramana’s darsan. Not finding penance, the Nirrutilinga. Instead, he went to the house
him at his usual place they went looking for him at an of a friend Viswanatha Iyer in order to have his after-
adjacent asram of one Padmanabha Swami. They found noon meal and take some rest. Pondering on the goal of
Ramana there. Though it was their first meeting, the penance he began to be filled with some misgivings. He
5522\n--- 第66页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
had performed the Siva panchaksari crores of times. He eyes. Opening a new chapter in both our lives, the words
had also subsequently chanted many other mantras like of nectar slowly flowed from him.
srividya. He had undergone several austerities including “‘When the mind enquires from where the notion “I”
fasting. Yet he did not experience the fruition of his pen- arises and dissolves right there at the origin of its birth,
ance. Why was this so? Surely the means prescribed in that is tapas. On the enquiry as to the exact origin from
the scriptures could not be wrong. Then, could there be where the sound of mantra arises, the mind dissolves at
any deficiency in his understanding of the true meaning the origin itself and that is tapas.’
of penance? When his mind was caught in this turmoil “I was gratified by this teaching … upadesa which
he suddenly remembered the Brahmana Swami on the came directly from a great teacher-guru. I had an experi-
hill. He decided to meet him right away in order to fulfill ence of floating on an ocean of bliss.”6
the purpose of his life. No sooner had he decided than It may be noted that the first part of the instruc-
he began his climb up the hill reaching there around two tions is in line with what was given earlier by Ramana
o’clock in the afternoon. He could see Brahmana Swami to Gambhiram Seshier and Sivaprakasam Pillai in 1900-
1902, the now famous “Who am ‘I’?” enquiry. However,
sitting outside the cave. What happened next is best stat-
ed in the Muni’s own words.
“Those were the days of the
Kartigai festival. People, people ev-
erywhere. At the dwelling of the
Swami also the devotees should
have been thronging. It was really
a surprise when there was no one
there and Swami was sitting alone.
I took courage in the thought that
this was an indication of divine will.
I approached the Swami with jubila-
tion. As soon as I reached him I held
his right foot with my right hand
and his left foot with my left hand
and prostrated with my whole body.
Getting up, I appealed thus: ‘I have
studied and understood the essence
of the Sastras. I have repeated the
great mantras with contemplation;
many austerities have I performed.
Missing still is the Lord’s grace.
Were there lapses in my tapas? Have
I missed its very nature? Though
learned, I am ignorant. I surrender
to you, All-knowing One. Accept
me as your disciple and bless me.’5
“Thus when I fell at his feet in
spiritual agony, desperately pleading
for guidance, a soothing stream of
his compassionate look flowed into
me and encompassed me. He was
the foremost among those who had
totally conquered his senses. He who
comprehended my state and situa-
tion in a moment, showered upon
me soothing rain of grace and bliss
from his fully open compassionate
53\n--- 第67页 ---\nTimeless in Time
the second part is new and in a sense equally revolu- inspired mood the Muni immediately wrote to his inti-
tionary. For, a vast number of seekers are initiated into mate disciples and well wishers: “I have obtained as my
mantras. Their faith in the efficacy of these mantras is guru a supreme sage known as Brahmana Swami, who
deep-rooted as the Muni’s was then. Ramana draws them lives in a cave in Arunachala. He is a great visionary:
gently, yet firmly, to the path of self-enquiry by turning an epitome of all good qualities; one who deserves the
their attention to the source of the mantra sound. Thus name of Bhagavan Maharshi. I have abridged his name
source consciousness would be awakened. to Ramana in a brief and beautiful manner. Accordingly
What was the state of the Muni on that eventful day? through my letters I have informed my disciples and
He was desperately thirsty for knowing the secret under- well-wishers that they should also call him Ramana.”8
lying the scriptures. His utter humility is also seen from
his remark “though learned, I am ignorant.” This fact is Ramana Gita—1917
heightened if one remembers that a large number of seek-
ers at that time considered the Muni to be their guru. His Though the Muni would leave Arunachala for tapasya
scriptural learning and tapasya had made him ripe and every now and then due to his own inner compulsion,
ready. What was lacking was the sadguru’s grace to light the magnetic pull of his guru Ramana would keep pulling
the fire of knowledge. The Self-realized knower of truth, him back to Arunachala. During those periods of his stay
Ramana, provided this. It was his grace which revealed at Arunachala some significant event or the other would
the truth to the Muni. happen. The Muni had come in 1913 and participated in a
The Muni remarks that a new chapter had opened up debate among the scholars on certain Vedantic questions.
not only for himself but Ramana as well. For eleven years The nature of the world and spiritual practices relating to
since his arrival at Arunachala in 1896, Ramana had re- the jnana path were discussed. When the Muni returned
mained silent and had not spoken except to his faithful again in 1917, he stayed in the Mango Tree Cave near
attendant Palaniswami. True, he had given instructions Skandasramam where Ramana was staying at that time.
to his mother, Gambhiram Seshier, and Sivaprakasam Proximity to the guru made him feel that it was time to
Pillai. But it was on sand or slate or paper. Ramana’s obtain authoritative pronouncements from Ramana on
very first oral instructions were only to the Muni. As a all the scriptures and extant religious practices. He felt
result, Ramana became more openly available to seekers that Ramana’s statements would be authentic being based
of truth. He had assumed the role earmarked for him, as on his direct experience of Self-awareness and his steady
the universal teacher whose teachings are most appropri- abidance in natural samadhi.
ate for this age. The world was not to be denied the soft In 1917, the Muni spent a few months questioning
and ambrosial voice of Ramana. What an epoch making Ramana directly and through seven of his disciples on
breaking of silence it has been! problems covering the entire gamut of spiritual practice.
Hence through these question and answer sessions we
Let the Whole World Know Him as Bhagavan have the authoritative clarifications of Ramana on such
Sri Ramana Maharshi important issues. Besides Ramana has also thrown clear
light on his direct path termed as “The Science of the
The Muni was in a state of ecstatic happiness on receiv- Heart.” Finding that these rulings were as epoch-mak-
ing Ramana’s advice. At last his Herculean penance had ing to seekers of truth as the message of Sri Krishna
borne fruit. A great peace flooded his whole being and he through the Bhagavad Gita, the Muni decided to record
was floating on an ocean of bliss. Till that evening he was the questions and answers under the name Ramana Gita.
meditating sitting right at the holy feet of his guru. Accordingly he arranged the questions and answers re-
On learning that Swami’s name was Venkataraman, corded in Sanskrit into eighteen chapters covering 300
the Muni turned it into the short and sweet name Ramana. verses.
He was not only his sadguru but the universal guru. One cannot be too grateful to the Muni for this mon-
Hence the Muni thought that he should also be called umental work. For Ramana Gita represents the quin-
“Maharshi.” Since he was endowed with all godly quali- tessence of wisdom. This work is a pathfinder in many
ties, the Muni felt he should be regarded as “Bhagavan.” ways. The subjects dealt with, such as “Paramount Duty,”
Therefore he proclaimed that henceforth his disciples and “Science of the Heart,” “Mind Control,” “Self-enquiry,”
the whole world should regard and address the Brahmana “Cutting the Knot,” just to mention a few, are significant
Swami as Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi.7 From then for truth seekers. A bird’s eye view of the contents will
onwards the name Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi has help in understanding the profound significance of the
become revered and famous throughout the world. In an work for a meaningful life.
5544\n--- 第68页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Ramana emphasizes that the purpose of all spiritual hides it? The externalization of the mind prevents aware-
practice is to discover the natural state. What is this natu- ness of the natural state. By appropriate spiritual prac-
ral state? It is a state when the mind is silent, when bliss tice the mind must be made to turn within. This is one’s
inundates, and consciousness shines in all its fullness. paramount duty. The best method for turning the mind
Why natural? It is termed natural because it is one’s own, within is self-enquiry. What constitutes self-enquiry?
it is not given and therefore cannot be taken away. What It is an enquiry about the subject, about the “I.” When
55\n--- 第69页 ---\nTimeless in Time
refl ects it. If the mind consciously merges in the
heart by vigilant self-enquiry a new way of life is
thrown open. It is a heart-based life instead of a
mind-centered life with all the limitations aris-
ing from attachments. Th en it does not make any
diff erence if one is in a jungle hermitage or in a
London fl at. For a steady river of bliss will fl ow
through all actions.
“Th e ‘A to Z’ of such a free and joyous life has
been set out by Ramana so simply and so directly
in Ramana Gita that one regrets the wasted years
of spiritual wandering at wrong doors.”9
Verse 2 of chapter two of Ramana Gita is the
fi rst original Sanskrit composition of Ramana.
Th ough Ramana was not familiar with Sanskrit
at that time, because of his steady wisdom, words
placed themselves automatically at the right place.
It emphasizes the importance of Self-abidance by
some appropriate practice, be it self-enquiry or
breath regulation. Th e story behind its composi-
tion as narrated by Ramana is worth recording.
“In 1915, when we were staying in Virupaksha
Cave during Chaturmasya (rainy season) an ar-
dent devotee, Jagadeeswara Sastri, one day wrote
down on a piece of paper the words ‘hridaya ku-
hara madhye’ (in the center of the heart’s cavity),
held it in his hand and sat down. When I asked
him what it was, he said he wanted to write a sloka
(verse) but when he actually began it he could write
only that much.
“I asked him to complete the rest. He said that
nothing was coming forth. Th ereaft er he just left the
paper under my seat. Th ough I reminded him any
number of times he pleaded his inability. One day
he left for some place. Before his return, I complet-
Ramana and Ganapati Muni ed the sloka, wrote ‘Jagadeesan’ and showed it to
him as soon as he returned. Th ose days he was very young.
attention is so focused on the “I” it would be seen to
He said, ‘Is it not Bhagavan who completed it? Why is it
be the center of the mind. Other thoughts exist only in
written Jagadeesan?’ I said, ‘I don’t know that! Was it not
relation to it. Th e “I”-thought and the mind are under-
Jagadeesan who completed it?’ Th en, saying, ‘If it was writ-
stood to be identical. Self-enquiry also reveals that what
ten by Jagadeesan please give me the paper,’ he took it away
we call the mind is only a phenomenon of the waking
and preserved it.”10
state. It is non-existent in deep sleep. It rises on waking
and sinks when sleep overtakes. Hence the necessity to Years later Kapali Sastri, one of the questioners in
search for its source. Th is search would lead one to the Ramana Gita, wrote in his commentary on it that he
spiritual heart from which all thoughts spring. Ramana was fi lled with a sense of awe at the signifi cance of this
has explained, in great detail, the working of the spiritual holy work. Writing in 1932 to a friend of his, Viswanatha
heart and how its consciousness spreads to the mind and Swami, he says, “My mind is given to the subject now.
thereaft er permeates the whole body. Th e analogy of the Waiting for the light to guide me aright so that I may not
sun and the moon is given to bring out the essential re- misuse the proud privilege of commenting upon the ut-
lationship between the spiritual heart and the mind. Th e terances of one the like of whom appears on earth once
heart is the source of consciousness and the mind only in a millennium or two.”11
5566\n--- 第70页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Some of the views expressed by Ramana in Ramana in the heart, your welfare is sure. Let the work be surren-
Gita are quite a departure from the traditional views held dered to Siva.”14
thus far. For instance he asserts that women too can prac- It is classic advice on par with the guidance to his
tice the path of knowledge if they are ripe for it. He also mother Azhagammal in 1898, to Sivaprakasam Pillai in
states that the body of a woman illumni is a temple of 1901, and to the Muni himself a year earlier when he had
God and consequently it should not be cremated but bur- sought his counsel about the true meaning of tapas.
ied and worshipped. We also fi nd that he places before One might say that this statement is the distilled
the society as its goal the ideal of “brotherhood based essence of both self-enquiry and surrender. One fi nds
on equality.” Just imagine how radical these views would that in this statement Ramana is emphasizing one cen-
have been in 1917. tral point again and again that “everything should be en-
Ramana was in his mid-thirties at that time. But what trusted to the all powerful doer of actions, the Lord of the
wisdom fl ows from his lips! One wonders, “Is there any- Universe.” Simultaneously one’s attention is drawn to the
thing which he does not know?” Th e image of the youth- fact that this enables one to shift the focus of attention to
ful, primal guru Dakshinamurti immediately comes to the source, the heart, and to abide there. Another angle of
the mind. his advice is that this is the excellent object of all spiritual
endeavor. At the same time one fi nds Ramana counseling
patience. For while fulfi lling the excellent object of Self-
Cast Your Burden on the Lord
of the Universe
In May 1908, the Muni started to Tiruvottiyur
for penance. He was in a great spiritual mood
aft er staying with the Maharshi for several
months at Pachaiamman Koil. His reason for
deciding to leave for penance is best stated in
his own words: “Even though seeking the Self
resulting in the perception of one’s own real
nature is undoubtedly the best attainment,
siddhi, I thought that it was not enough.”12
He also questioned the Maharshi, “Is seek-
ing the source of ‘I’-thought suffi cient for ac-
complishing all my aims or is mantra dhyana
needed?” Th e Maharshi replied, “Th e former
is enough.”13 Th e Muni was convinced. Yet the
idea of penance was so deeply ingrained that
he sought Ramana’s blessings. Out of the vast-
ness of his compassion Ramana advised the
whole world through the Muni how the goal
of Self-attention is to be pursued.
“One should cast one’s burden on the Lord of
the Universe who is always victorious. He is the
excellent doer of all actions. You should always
concentrate your intellect on the heart, which is
the seat of the Atman and abide there.
“Th is doer, the Lord, is powerful enough to
fulfi ll your object in the future.
“Th e Lord of the Universe controlling the
past and the future should be entrusted as the
effi cient actor.
“When the time comes, the excellent object
would be fulfi lled. Let there be no doubt in your
mind, jewel of the learned. By steady abidance
57\n--- 第71页 ---\nTimeless in Time
knowledge is surely the Lord’s burden, the best timing for blessings brought about this miracle. To complete the
it is known only to Him, because He is the all-knowing account Ramana himself stated many years later what
controller of the past and the future. happened then. When the Muni narrated this incident,
On reaching Tiruvottiyur, the Muni chose a temple Ramana explained, “One day some years ago I lay down,
of Lord Ganesa for his penance. While he was immersed but I was awake. I suddenly felt my body carried up higher
in it, on the eighteenth day while meditating with at- and higher till all objects disappeared and all round me
tention, he saw the Maharshi sitting by his side. “Out of was one vast mass of white light. Then suddenly the body
confusion, wonder, and devotion I got up and the guru descended and objects began to appear and disappear. The
placed his hand on my head and made me sit.”15 “A cur- idea occurred to me that I was at Tiruvottiyur. I was on
rent of energy burst forth filling his entire body. The a high road. On one side at some distance removed from
Muni was convinced that his guru the Maharshi, who it was a Ganapati temple. I went in and talked, but what
was none other than Kartikeya, had covered the distance I said or did, I do not recollect. Suddenly I woke up and
between Arunachala and Tiruvottiyur, miraculously, to found myself lying in Virupaksha Cave. I mentioned this
bless him.”16 immediately to Palaniswami who was always with me.”18
Ulladu Narpadu—Sat Darsanam
For many of Ramana’s works Muruganar was a catalyst.
In 1928, Muruganar felt that in the interest of genuine
seekers of truth, Ramana should compose forty verses
on Reality. Its purpose was to serve as a regular treatise
on the subject by setting out, in logical order, the salient
features of his teachings. Ramana would never say no to
his earnest disciples and devotees. The forty verses were
arranged in a proper order, according to the thoughts
expressed in them, to make for the regular treatment
of the subject. It was published under the title Ulladu
Narpadu.19 The world of seekers of truth, for all times to
come, will remain indebted to Muruganar for it.
The Muni translated the work into Sanskrit in the
mellifluous Upajati meter. The translation Sat-Darsanam
has become a classic in spiritual literature. The reason is
given by the Muni himself: “For it reflects the enchanting
words of divine Ramana, which give the essence of truth
easily, and is a delight to seekers.”20
Sat-Darsanam is a compound word. Sat meaning
Existence, the Real, the Truth, and Darsanam means its
perception. It also means the experience of those abiding
in Sat or Truth. In this case it refers to Ramana’s expe-
rience. This work stresses that abidance in the spiritual
heart is Sat-Darsanam. Ramana repeatedly said that the
Ramana never left Arunachala after September 1, only infallible means to do so is to enquire into the source
1896, when he arrived there “in obedience to his Father’s of the mind and he has given the necessary method for it.
command and in search of him.” How then could his Hence this work is a practice-oriented scripture, in which
body have been in two places at the same time, both we find that “the original and independent utterances of
at Arunachala and at Tiruvottiyur? According to the Ramana are like Upanishads, based on direct experience,
Muni, “The Lord of the yogis in the world of Gods, flew and their message is for all.”21
by the path brightened by moonlight and having heard
the word ‘Tiruvottiyur’ came down to the earth. Then The Muni and the Maharshi—The Later Years
he walked a long distance, turned west, saw the temple
of Ganesa and entered it.”17 Perhaps the intensity of the Whatever may be the other interests in his life, the Muni
disciple’s penance and his desire to receive his guru’s always gave top priority to spreading knowledge about
5588\n--- 第72页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Ramana’s unique stature. This was the constant undercur- “Forty Verses in Praise.” This was chanted before Ramana
rent of the Muni’s life along which he traveled with faith each morning before the Vedic chanting. Now it is be-
and devotion. His overwhelming devotion to Ramana ing chanted in front of Ramana’s shrine. This indicates
is evident in his letters to his disciples, in his letters to the regard and love Ramana had for the Muni and also
Ramana from Sirsi in Karnataka, and in his composi- the Muni’s stature. “Out of the tender store of the disciple
tions, particularly Chatvarimsat—Forty Verses in Praise and the sadguru, of Nayana and Ramana, something in-
of Ramana. When others tried to praise him he would definable but extraordinarily beautiful and evergreen has
not take the credit but say, “It is not I but the Maharshi been bequeathed to posterity.”25
who is doing all these things.” To Ramana belonged the
throne of the “Universal Teacher,” a throne which had
been vacant for centuries since Adi Sankara. He was the
humble disciple seeking sadguru Ramana’s blessings for a
twofold purpose, for his own steady abidance in the natu-
ral state and even more than that for the glorification of
Ramana himself.
Ramana held the Muni in the highest regard and
used to call him Nayana, which is a term of endearment
meaning child or disciple or father. Ramana started call-
ing the Muni Nayana in the following circumstances. A
devotee asked, “Why does Bhagavan call Ganapati Muni,
Nayana?’’ “There is a reason for it,” he replied. “It is my
custom to address all people with respect. Moreover, he was
older than me. I therefore always used to call him Ganapati
Sastri Garu. That was very distressing to him. Hence he
begged me several times not to do so, saying. ‘Am I not your
disciple? You should call me by a familiar name. This is
very unfair.’ I did not pay any heed to his protests. At last
one day he insisted on my giving up the formal way of ad-
dressing him and adopting a familiar one. All his disciples
call him Nayana. So I made it an excuse and said I too
would call him Nayana like the others. He agreed to it be-
cause Nayana means a child and a disciple could be ad-
dressed as one’s own child. I agreed because Nayana also
means father and hence it would not matter so far as I was
concerned. I was still addressing him in respectful terms.
Whenever I asked him to come here or go there he was still
uncomfortable because after all that he had done, I contin-
ued to talk to him with the respect due to elders.”22
When a telegram giving news of the Muni’s
mahasamadhi was received at Sri Ramanasramam,
Ramana said in a voice choked with emotion, “Where can
we find another like him?”23 He also spoke at length very
appreciatively about his humble conduct though he was so
learned and capable. He referred to the great worth of the
N
compositions of the Muni like Uma Sahasram and Hara
Sahasram. Someone asked how the Muni had become an
inspired poet, an asu kavi, Ramana mentioned that it is
believed to be due to the “milk or honey given to him by F. H. Humphreys
Lord Siva who appreciated his intense tapas.”24
Soon after the Muni’s mahasamadhi, Ramana himself Humphreys joined the Indian Police Service at Vellore,
arranged the occasional stray verses in his praise com- near Tiruvannamalai, in 1911. Due to his past spiritual
posed by the Muni and titled the collection Chatvarimsat, practices he used to have visions which enabled him to
59\n--- 第73页 ---\nTimeless in Time
they performed miracles were they
aware that they performed mira-
cles?” Humphreys could readily see
the logic of it, that they were only
“the media through which God’s
power did its work.” Another ques-
tion related to helping the world to
which Ramana advised him, “Help
yourself, you will help the world.”3
The main focus of Ramana’s
advice was to turn the attention of
Humphreys to the supreme power
responsible for everything. “The
phenomena we see are curious and
surprising but the most marvelous
thing of it all we do not realize and
that is that one, illimitable force is
responsible for:
◆ All the phenomena we see,
◆ The act of our seeing them.
foresee the coming events in the spiritual field. As soon as Do not fix your attention on all these changing things
he landed in Bombay, he fell ill. While convalescing there of life, death, and phenomena. Do not think of even the
in a hospital he had a clear vision of his Telugu teacher actual act of seeing them or perceiving them, but only of
Narasimayya, who in turn was a disciple of Ganapati that, which sees all these things. That which is responsible
Muni, who regarded Ramana as his guru. One might say for it all.”4
that the divine literally led him to Ramana.1 The importance of Ramana’s advice is further
After joining at Vellore, he again fell sick and had to strengthened by the fact that it was given as a guru would
go to a cool hill station in April that year. On returning he to his disciple. Ramana told him, “I have given you this
drew a picture of a “mountain cave with a sage standing teaching in the same words as the Masters give it to their
at its entrance and a stream gently flowing down the hill intimate chelas.”5
in front of the cave.” The Telugu teacher identified this as N
Ramana and told him about his glorious state. He soon
met the Muni and the three of them went to Virupaksha
Cave in November. Shortly thereafter he paid a second
Lesser Known Devotees of Ramana
visit on his own. He traveled all the way by his motorbike
from Vellore in order to be able to do so. On the sec-
Ramana Dasa Sadananda
ond visit A.S. Krishnawami Iyer, then a judicial officer, a
District Munsiff, who happened to be present, acted as an (Seshagiri Iyer)
interpreter.2 Humphreys paid his third visit also in quick
succession. Seshagiri Iyer was a teacher in P.S. High School, Madras.
There is a contemporaneous record of the questions On the suggestion of his brother-in-law, he visited
and answers on all the three occasions. We might say that Ramana for the first time on Tuesday, November 15, 1915
this has ensured a permanent place for Humphreys in the at Virupaksha Cave. The impact of this first meeting was
minds of spiritual seeekers. so great that he was tongue-tied. He was filled with nec-
Humphreys was barely twenty-one years of age at tarine bliss in the joyous presence of Ramana.1 On the
that time and therefore we notice an uninhibited sponta- following day he visited Ramana again because he had
neity in his interviews with Ramana and a special charm some doubts on the spiritual path which needed clarifica-
in the way Ramana clarified his doubts. tion. Some of these questions are as follows:
Because of his occult background some of his ear-
ly questions related to miracles. He wished to know: Q. How am I to ascertain who “I” am?
“Master can I perform miracles as Sri Krishna and Jesus A. By frequent, if not constant, questioning and search-
did?” Ramana countered it by another question: “When ing within.
6600\n--- 第74页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
Q. How to deal with the mind which stands in the of Ramana. Ramana told him: “Do not worry about the
way of such enquiry? sound, but enquire wherefrom the sound arises. Everything
A. Th e mind is nothing but thoughts and the root arises from the Self. Th erefore it will dissolve into the Self.
thought is “I” which is known as ego. When the question What Is alone will remain.”3
“Who am I?” preponderates it kills all other thoughts at N
fi rst and it goes ultimately.
Q. What displaces the disappearing ego?
A. Th e all knowing feeling of bliss shining as “I” devoid Sacred Hands
of qualities will take its place.2
On Monday the 31st August 1896, in most Indian homes
Mastan
the birth of Sri Krishna was being celebrated. Ramana was
fatigued and hungry. Aft er he left his home on the 29th of
Mastan Sahib was a weaver from Desur. He, along August he had not had any proper meal. So he walked to
with other devotees from that place, formed a group the house of one Muthukrishna Bhagavatar and begged
“Ramanananda Madalayam” for conducting programs for food. Being a happy and auspicious day he was given
connected with teachings of Ramana. He used to be a a sumptuous meal at noon. On the following day, the 1st
frequent visitor of Virupaksha Cave. From 1914 onwards September 1896, in the early morning hours he reached
he used to stay with Ramana for long stretches. Tiruvannamalai. Aft er reporting his arrival “to his Father
One day he requested Ramana to bestow his grace on at Arunachaleswara temple” he remained immersed in
him. Th en the following conversation took place. his own natural bliss. Th ere was none to feed him and
R.: What do you like? Saguna upasana or nirguna he was so intoxicated with inner bliss that he himself did
upasana? not ask for food. It is then that on the following day, the
M.: I would like to perform nirguna upasana. Lord Himself made Ramana His concern. Th ere were
R.: If you observe wherefrom all the thoughts arise many mendicants in the temple. One of them who was
then they would all be dissolved in the heart. What Is only a mouna Swami (a silent sadhu), who told his disciples
will remain. through signs at noon, “I do not know who this boy is.
Even though he was thus instructed Mastan used But he appears to be tired. Please get some food and
to hear sounds during practice and sought the advice give it to him.” With his photographic memory Ramana
61\n--- 第75页 ---\nTimeless in Time
recalls what they had brought. “It was boiled rice. Each not give up her resolve to feed me; so at last the old mother
grain was sized. There was sour water under it and there herself came regularly, and being elderly, and thinking that
was pickle in it. Taking it as the first bhiksa given to me by therefore there was no harm in it, used to wake me up by
Arunachaleswara I ate the rice and drank the water given shaking me and then give me food. Shortly afterwards, the
to me. That happiness can never be forgotten.”1 The first sa- old mother passed away, and I too shifted from there to a
cred hands which fed Ramana were those of this anony- distant place. Ratnamma could no longer go the long dis-
mous swami. The hands which fed Ramana in those days tance to feed me, and so gave up her attempts. What does it
were especially sacred. Because in his state then, the total matter to what community she belonged, she was pure. She
inward absorption and outward silence as well, his body had great non-attachment and great devotion.”3
would have been lost to the world before the wonder of Ramana recalls the interlude with Ratnamma in ev-
his liberating message could be revealed. ery little detail nearly fifty years after the event. What
To escape from the mischief of urchins Ramana had compassion he had for this unknown dancer, who had
entered into a dark underground shrine, Patalalingam, lovingly insisted on his being fed properly when he had
which was totally neglected, dingy, and full of insects and no thought of the body and its needs.
reptiles. There too the infinite took a hand by sending one When Ramana was bodily lifted out of Patalalingam
Ratnammal who braved the darkness of the place, went and brought to the Subrahmanya shrine the first Mouna
into the underground cave, and gave food to Ramana. Swami used to give him milk mixed with turmeric, sugar,
Hers too are sacred hands. plantains etc., which was poured on the Goddess Apeeta
In B.V. Narasimha Swami’s biography there is a ref- Kuchamba during abhisheka. The priest who noticed this
erence to Ratnamma. When Ramana had gone into the one day said that pure milk poured over the Goddess
dark Patalalinga area in the thousand-pillared hall of the should be collected immediately and given to him. This
Arunachaleswara temple, Ramana was not aware that his sustained him for a few more months.4
thighs and legs were full of sores from which blood and During November and December 1896 there was
pus were flowing. This was because ants, mosquitoes, and a big festival in the town, the Kartigai festival. During
worms were feasting on his thighs. Once Ratnammal, that time many sadhus used to come to the temple and
who went into the pit to give him food, pleaded with him one of them, Uddandi Nayanar, took up the responsibil-
about his pitiable condition and tried to persuade him ity of caring for Ramana’s body. This privilege was later
to come to her house. To save him from the attacks of taken over by Annamalai Tambiran who passed it on to
the pests she left a clean piece of cloth to sit on. Ramana Palaniswami.
did not respond. Such was the intensity of his inwardness
that he noticed nothing.2
It appears that later, when Ramana shifted to the gar-
den surrounding the temple, she had a more active role
in providing food to him. A very graphic account is given
by Ramana himself which is extracted in full: “I was liv-
ing under the madhuka tree; a twenty year old dancing
girl, by name Ratnamma, saw me one day while going to
and from the temple to dance. She grew devoted to me and
got disgusted with her profession, and told her mother that
she would not eat unless she consented to give food to me.
So both of them brought food. But I was then in deep medi-
tation and opened neither my eyes nor my mouth, even
when they shouted. But they somehow woke me up by ask-
ing a passerby to pull me by the hand; they then gave me
food and left. When Ratnamma insisted that she must feed
me daily before she ate, her mother said, “You are young
and so is the Swami, and he does not wake until somebody
touches and pulls him. We can’t do that: what can we do?”
Ratnamma then asked a first cousin of hers for assistance
and with his help used to give me food daily. After some
time, however, relatives of the boy felt this work to be un-
Echammal
dignified and so stopped sending him. She, however, would
6622\n--- 第76页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
After some devotees joined
Ramana at Virupaksha Cave
they went around the streets
of the town every day collect-
ing alms. This would be shared
equally by all of them. It would
serve as a single meal and of-
ten there would either be no
food or only adequate food.
Again the divine took a hand by
bringing Echammal in 1906 to
the Virupaksha Cave. Her name
was Lakshmiammal but she was
called Echammal. To this saint-
ly person belongs the credit of
serving food to Ramana and
a few of his devotees for the
next 38 years until she passed
away in 1945. Before she was 25
she lost her husband, then her
only son, and finally her only
daughter in quick succession.
The shock stunned her and she
left her village Mundakolathur
and went to various pilgrimage
centers including Gokarnam. She met holy sages, yet her under his chin and his right hand over the leaf. All those
sorrow remained deep and inconsolable. When she re- waiting to dine began looking at one another. Those in
turned to her village in 1906, she was told about Ramana the kitchen too began to enquire among themselves in
and she immediately went to Virupaksha Cave. She stood whispers about the possible reason. Suddenly they re-
for an hour in his presence and spoke nothing. No words membered that the food sent by Echammal had not been
were exchanged. Wonder of wonders! She stood trans- served. They then served her food saying “Oh! We forgot
fixed and could not think of leaving the asram. Finally to serve this.” Only then did Bhagavan give the signal for
she somehow pulled herself away. By the grace of the eating and he commenced eating as well.6 There is an-
Maharshi “the incubus of sorrow had been lifted from other incident relating to the compassion which Ramana
her heart.”5 had for Echammal. The asram management out of re-
Noticing that there were no arrangements for gard for her old age once decided that Echammal need
Ramana’s food she would prepare a meal every day for not take the trouble of bringing the food all the way. For
him and some of his devotees and carry it to him. Echammal this was a great blow. Her very existence was
Whatever was left over was to be her prasadam. This re- for serving food to Bhagavan. Hearing this Bhagavan re-
solve she kept up even after mother Azhagammal came fused to enter the dining hall when the midday meal bell
to stay with Ramana and after the kitchen came up in rang. He never gave any reason. The devotees soon under-
Skandasramam as well. When Ramanasramam grew stood that he was protesting on the ban on Echammal. By
very big everyone felt it was unnecessary for her to take this time Echammal had gone back to town. On hearing
the trouble anymore. But it was only for this purpose that about this she returned at once and requested Bhagavan
she lived. She would not miss a single day. Even when she to enter the dining hall and have his meal. Bhagavan did
was sick she would arrange to send the food. Ramana in so.7 After this every one knew the importance which
turn showed great compassion to her. Nagamma reports Ramana attached to the great service which Echammal
an incident when Ramana waited for her food. One day had been rendering from the time when he was compara-
the cooks, forgetting to serve the food sent by Echammal, tively unknown.
N
finished serving all the other items of food cooked in the
asram. Bhagavan would usually signal to the others to
start eating. But that time he sat silently with his left hand
63\n--- 第77页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Ramana’s Mother Azhagammal Her first child, Nagaswami, was born in 1877. On
December 30, 1879, on the Ardra Darsana day, sacred for
Azhagammal was born at Pasalai, a village near Siva as Nataraja, her second son Venkataraman was born.
Manamadurai, in Tamil Nadu. She was married to During her pregnancy of Venkataraman, she had a tre-
Sundaram Iyer of Tiruchuzhi at an early age. Sundaram mendous burning sensation all over the body which did
Iyer was a very successful lawyer in the local court. Theirs not respond to medical treatment. Only juice extracted
was an open house in which guests were always welcome. from bilwa leaves, considered sacred for worship of Siva,
Azhagammal would not hesitate to serve the guests even could relieve her. After the child was as born Azhagammal
in the middle of night. had plenty of milk and Venkataraman fed on it even
Azhagammal learnt hundreds of devotional songs, up to the age of five. Venkataraman and Azhagammal
pregnant with Vedantic meaning, from the elder ladies were so generous that in this feeding, a motherless child
Meenakshi, from the neighboring house,
would also partake.
Azhagammal would cast aside all dis-
tinctions when it came to the question of
giving food. Her warm-heartedness in this
regard stood out throughout her life. In
those days there was a social taboo against
the interdining of Muslims and Hindus,
but Azhagammal would gladly provide
many a meal for Venkataraman’s Muslim
friend, Sab Jaan.
In these happy years, a third son,
Nagasundaram, and a daughter, Alamelu,
were also born to her.
In 1892, Sundaram Iyer passed away. It
was literally a bolt from the blue. Sundaram
Iyer was in his mid-forties and was the
head of the joint family. His prosperity
as a lawyer was shared by everyone. His
sudden death made a world of difference.
Azhagammal and her younger children,
Nagasundaram and Alamelu, went to
Manamadurai and stayed with Nelliappa
Iyer, a younger brother of Sundaram Iyer.
Nagaswami and Venkataraman went to
their younger paternal uncle, Subba Iyer,
at Madurai.1
Mother’s Anguish
The sudden departure of Venkataraman
from Madurai on August 29, 1896, filled
mother Azhagammal’s heart with anguish.
Ramana and Mother Azhagammal Being a helpless widow she could only en-
at Tiruchuzhi. In those days, when formal school edu- treat her brothers-in-law Nelliappa Iyer and Subba Iyer,
cation of women was unknown, she learnt music and to make an all out search, which they did. However, in
received spiritual instructions from these elders. They the absence of any clue, they drew a blank.
were only too ready to teach Azhagammal for she would Each passing day added to the agony of mother
serve them willingly and well. From one venerable old Azhagammal. Her dear son had left home on August
lady, Tulasamma, she also received upadesa of the sacred 29. 1896. All leads and clues about his whereabouts
mantra Aham Brahmasmi. were proving futile. Days were passing into months and
6644\n--- 第78页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
months into years. Yet there was no trace of him. After family, gave them the heart-warming message. He said
two years she had reached the point of despair. Were all “Venkataraman is a revered saint at Tiruvannamalai.” This
her prayers falling on deaf ears? Were all the great gods young man had visited some Mutt where he had heard
really cold and indifferent to human sorrow and suffer- Annamalai Tambiran describing with awe and utmost
ing? True, her son had left a message of consolation, a reverence the sanctity of a young saint at Tiruvannamalai
message that he would be well taken care of wherever he who hailed from Tiruchuzhi. This young man had put
was. He had told the truth, that he was leaving home at two and two together and hastened to inform the fam-
his Father’s command. But can Azhagammal be blamed ily.3
if she did not have this confidence? Could she be aware At that time Ramana was staying in the mango grove
then of the certainty that no one can care more than God adjacent to Gurumurtam. This sanctuary away from
for his devotees? How could she know of a protection the crowd was facilitated by a devotee, the owner of the
which would be greater than what even her motherly love grove. He had given strict instructions to Rama Naicker,
could give? She was desperate and helpless. Therefore the the watchman of the grove, not to allow anyone inside. In
mood of surrender was fully on her. May 1898, Nelliappa Iyer came to the grove to meet his
Though the laws of grace are mysterious, beyond the nephew but the watchman refused him permission to en-
mind’s comprehension, one thing is clear. When one re- ter and would not budge despite all the persuasive skills
alizes the utter futility of all human endeavors and recog- of Nelliappa Iyer. Finally, however, the watchman agreed
nizes that God alone is our true
helper, then the support is very
much there, unfailingly there. So
here too we find the response. In
one sense Ramana has no par-
ticular individual identity, he did
not sign the note he had written
before leaving for Arunachala.
Yet, at this juncture he chose to
reveal to his mother the neces-
sary information by which she
could find out where and how
he was now. One government
official insisted on his writing
down his name. “Venkataraman
-Tiruchuzhi” was what he wrote.
What more definite data could
be given? One is filled with won-
der at this act of grace. For Ramana never wrote his name to let him in if the Swami had no objection. He wanted
after leaving his home, except on this solitary occasion. to send him a note. But he had not brought any pen with
“For he knew the suffering of the heart separated from him. He took out a neem twig, sharpened the end to a
its dear one.”2 One might ask why he did not help ear- point, plucked a ripe prickly-pear from its stalk, cut it
lier. The reason was that his mother and his relatives were open, dipped the twig into the red juice of the pear, and
making their efforts. They were confident of success. But wrote on a slip with it. It read, “Nelliappa Iyer, Pleader,
when the dead-end situation came, when mother had no Manamadurai, wishes to have your darsan (come into
other recourse, Ramana responded to her prayers and re- your august presence).”4
vealed what perhaps could never have been discovered. Ramana’s observation was flawless. He noticed at
He had allowed himself to be traced. once that on the backside of the slip there was the hand-
The identification happened at the Gurumurtam writing of his elder brother Nagaswami on a paper of
temple at Tiruvannamalai. How did this information the Registration Department, which meant that he had
reach mother and the family? joined that department presumably as a clerk. Naturally
On May 1, 1898, Subba Iyer died at Madurai. the uncle was allowed to come in. He was in for a rude
Azhagammal, Nelliappa Iyer, the surviving uncle, and his shock. Ramana’s body was unwashed, dirt-laden, his hair
family went there for the funeral. Before the ceremonies matted, nails long and curled. He was deeply moved.
were over a young man from Tiruchuzhi, known to the After the death of Ramana’s father he had mainly looked
65\n--- 第79页 ---\nTimeless in Time
edge. Later Ramana recalled,
“He went away fully satisfied. Till
then he was anxious about me. He
passed away a few days later.”5
Ramana also added, “If it had
been Subba Iyer, he would never
have gone back home leaving me
here. For he was a man of great
courage and pride. He would have
bundled me up and carried me
home. As I was destined to stay
here, my whereabouts were not
known as long as he was alive.
Nelliappa Iyer being spiritually
minded and mild in his ways, left
me here thinking ‘Why trouble
him?’”6
Nelliappa Iyer’s trip to Tiru-
vannamalai in May 1898 and his
Group photo with Ramana and his mother seated next to him
attempts to persuade his nephew
after the family. In fact, initially he found it tough even to to return home proved futile. Naturally Azhagammal
identify his nephew and could do so only with reference was sorely disappointed. Still, as a fond mother she was
to a big light red mole on Ramana’s right foot. confident that if she went there personally, she would
Nelliappa Iyer used all his argumentative skills as a definitely succeed in persuading her son to return home.
lawyer to convince Ramana that he should return home. Even though she was eager to rush to Tiruvannamalai
He assured him that the family members would in no and bring him back she had to hold her impatience as
way interfere with his inner or outer life. All that they she needed an escort. Her first son Nagaswami, who had
were anxious about was that his body should be looked joined Government service in the Registration Depart-
after properly when he was engaged in such severe pen- ment, could get leave only during Christmas holidays.
ance. He could even continue his tapas at the temple at She was therefore forced to wait till then.
Manamadurai, undisturbed. These pleadings were obvi- When Nagaswami and Azhagammal went to Tiru-
ously of no avail. Ramana had no longer any will of his vannamalai, in December 1898, during Christmas vaca-
own. He had come to Arunachala in “obedience to his tion they learnt that Ramana had shifted to Pavazhakun-
Father’s command” and had to stay there the rest of his dru, a hillock adjoining Arunachala. Notwithstanding
bodily life to do his Father’s work. Hence he continued the exhausting climb, Azhagammal went there with
to maintain silence. The uncle had no option except to eager anticipation. She was seeing Venkataraman after
return, sad and wondering how he could convey the twenty-eight seemingly endless months. What she saw of
disappointing news to Ramana’s heartbroken mother his physical condition pained her to the core. Long nails,
Azhagammal. matted hair, a small cod piece, and a body covered with
To make matters worse, on the way he met a Swami dust, presented a sight which she could not bear. Day af-
who spoke disparagingly about Ramana’s knowledge of ter day she poured out her longing and loving concern.
Vedanta. This made his uncle wonder whether his neph- However, he did not break the silence which he had been
ew had lost on both counts, in the affairs of the world observing since his arrival. On one occasion the mother
and “other-worldly” matters as well. Being a fond uncle enlisted the sympathy of other persons present and re-
he did come again, twice, to see Ramana when he was quested them to intercede on her behalf. One of them,
in the Virupaksha Cave. On the first occasion he sat qui- Pachiappa Pillai, said, “Your mother is weeping and cry-
etly with the other devotees. However, on the second ing. Why should you not at least say ‘Yes’ or ‘No.’ You need
occasion Ramana was explaining the meaning of the not break your silence, but you can at least write—here
Dakshinamurti Stotra when the uncle appeared suddenly. is some paper and a pencil.” Thereupon Ramana wrote
Ramana was caught in the act of explaining. Therefore he thus: “The Creator, remaining everywhere, makes each one
continued. It is only after hearing it that the uncle realized play his role in life according to their karma. That which is
the stature of Ramana and his depth of scriptural knowl- not destined will not happen, despite every effort. What is
6666\n--- 第80页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
destined is bound to happen. This is certain.
Therefore the best course is to remain silent.”7
This was the first written message given
by Ramana to anyone. Its beauty and appro-
priateness are enhanced by the fact that it
was given to the mother.
This message has been interpreted to
mean that in Ramana’s view everything
is pre-ordained. Such an interpretation
would not be correct. This particular mes-
sage needs to be understood in its context.
Ramana had come to Arunachala in obedi-
ence to His command. There could be no
question of his returning home. Therefore
he did not wish to give the slightest hope
or encouragement to his mother. She had to
accept that the decision to leave home and to
View of Skandasramam
come to Arunachala was irrevocable. Again, Ramana and
Ramana’s attitude should not be mistaken for harshness. Mother at Virupaksha and Skandasramam
On the contrary, it was his consideration which had en-
abled his mother to trace him, and to know that he would
Mother had to return home with a deep sense of sorrow
always be available to her at Tiruvannamalai. When the
at the thought of complete neglect by Ramana of his body
situation demanded there could be no better son, as
and the fear of its consequences. At that stage she was not
would be seen later when he looked after his mother dur-
ripe enough to accept the truth that her son belonged to
ing her typhoid fever in 1914, and in the last years of her
the entire universe. He had come as the teacher of the age
life from 1916 to 1922. It was Ramana’s liberating touch
“on his Father’s business” and could not be confined to the
which freed mother from the cycle of births and deaths at
bonds of family life and home. Yet, deeply rooted as she
the time of her passing away in May 1922.
was in the Vedantic tradition, she was not overwhelmed
by the situation.
Unfortunately for her,
much worldly sorrow lay
ahead of her. Her first son
Nagaswami died a couple of
years later, leaving behind
his young widow. Nelliappa
Iyer, too, who had been a pil-
lar of strength, passed away.
She bore the brunt of the sor-
row bravely. After an interval
of fifteen years she again vis-
ited Ramana, in 1913, while
returning from a pilgrimage
to Varanasi. He was staying
in the Virupaksha Cave at
that time. Mother noticed
two changes. He was held in
the highest respect not only
by Vedic scholars, but also
the poor, the downtrodden,
and even small children. He
spoke very little but was no
Group photo with Ramana and his mother standing next to him longer observing the silence
67\n--- 第81页 ---\nTimeless in Time
which had baffled her in 1898. He had made himself more Let them protect my mother from death.
responsive to the needs of the devotees and seekers. For What is death if scrutinized?
had not his universal role begun in 1907 when Ganapati Arunachala, blazing fire of knowledge,
Muni proclaimed him to be the world teacher? Be that Burn away the dross.
as it may, she returned home after a short stay content Absorb my sweet mother in you,
that her worst fears had not materialized. Ramana was in What need would there be then for cremation?
reasonably good health though there was no cooking in Arunachala, dispeller of Maya’s veil,
Virupaksha and he and the inmates depended on what- Why then the delay in curing my mother’s delirium?
ever was offered by devotees or was procured as alms. O Mother of those who seek refuge in you,
She had come with her daughter-in-law Mangalam, Is there a better shield than you from fate’s blows?8
the wife of her youngest son Nagasundaram. Mother
In this prayer we find something unique. Bhagavan
sought Ramana’s blessings for her to beget a son. By his
addressing Arunachala as “Mother” instead of as “Father”
grace Mangalam conceived soon after and gave birth to a
as he always used to. Lines like “What is death if scruti-
boy. The child was named Venkataraman in gratitude. He
nized?” “What need would there be then for cremation?”
was to be the only lineal descendant of Sundaram Iyer’s
take one to philosophical heights.
family, for Mangalam died young and Nagasundaram re-
The prayer was answered. Azhagammal recovered
nounced family life.
and returned to Manamadurai.
In 1914, mother again came to her ascetic son, this
Though mother recovered from her encounter with
time on her return from a pilgrimage to Tirupati. She
death she began to feel strongly that it was high time she
stayed with Ramana for a longer spell during which time
stayed with Ramana in the last years of her life. Like all
she fell seriously ill for two to three weeks. Once, when
devout persons she wanted to bid goodbye to the end-
her condition became delirious, Ramana had no option
less death-birth cycle. Who could be a better guide than
except to pray to Arunachala at whose call he had left
her own son to whom the world was turning for solace
home, and who was his sole refuge. His composition
and an inward way of life? Having come to this firm con-
“For Mother’s Recovery,” is most moving. In this we find
clusion, she shifted to Tiruvannamalai in 1916 to be in
Ramana’s complete faith in Arunachala’s powers, as the
Ramana’s close proximity and to visit him daily. In the be-
conqueror of death, to change the course of events. Every
ginning she stayed with Echammal, who would prepare
single line brims with love for his mother and faith in the
food daily for Ramana and the inmates of Virupaksha
supreme power of Arunachala.
Cave and take it to them. Mother would accompany her.
Oh Lord in the form of hill, Notwithstanding her resolve it was increasingly evident
You are the remedy for the endless chain of births. that the fatigue of climbing up to the cave was beyond her
For me your feet alone are the refuge. physical strength at her age. The lady devotees intervened
Your duty it is to remove my mother’s suffering and on her behalf and pleaded that she should be permitted
govern her. to stay with Ramana at the Virupaksha Cave itself. Not
O Conqueror of Time! knowing Ramana’s views and apprehensive that other
Your lotus feet are my refuge, lady devotees too would follow suit, the inmates flatly
6688\n--- 第82页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
refused to hear their pleadings. The lady devotees per- cept any special treatment. She hoped to persuade him to
sisted, saying that mother was mother, and therefore spe- accept her loving labor. Hence she secretly collected the
cial. They also promised never to ask for such a privilege necessary ingredients. What happened is best described
for themselves. Yet the inmates remained stubborn. The in Ramana’s own words: “Leisurely she took out the wood-
mother was about to return in deep sorrow. en roller, wooden seat, loose flour, and the balls of paste
Ramana, who was silent till then, was moved. He got and commenced making appalams. There were about two
up, held her hand and said, “Come let us go, if not here to three hundred to be made. She could not prepare them
we can stay somewhere else, come.” Alarmed, everyone all single-handed. I knew the job. So she quietly began tell-
regretted their negative stand and begged of him in one ing me, ‘My boy, please help me with it.’ I got the opportu-
voice, “Please stay with us. Mother too is welcome.”9 nity I was waiting for. If I were lenient in this, she would
Ramana now had the opportunity to give the nec- start something else. I wanted to put a timely stop to it. I
essary guidance to his mother. Firstly, he had to wean said, ‘You have renounced everything and have come here,
her out of the kitchen-religion, out of her orthodoxy. He haven’t you? Why all this? You should rest content with
would make fun of it. For instance he would say, “Amma, whatever is available. I won’t help you. I won’t eat them if
what are you going to eat? Today, they have brought drum- you prepare them. Make them all yourself, and eat them
sticks and onions. If you eat them, will you not encounter yourself.’ She was silent for a while and again started say-
a forest of drumsticks and mountains
of onions on the way to moksha?”10
Gradually she came to see that moder-
ation in food was all that was required
for sadhana.
Besides her ingrained orthodox
habits there was an even more impor-
tant hurdle. It was the understandable
feeling of being special as Ramana’s
mother. Ramana would frequently tell
her that all women were his mothers.
There was undoubtedly a corrosion of
her background because of these les-
sons from Ramana. Yet the real cause
for the transformation in her was the
way Ramana lived before her very
eyes, day in and day out. How could
mother’s mental notions remain un-
changed? She too felt like a mother to
all those who had entrusted their lives
to Ramana. Her heart began to blos-
som. This change would be seen in an
illustration. Once a man carrying fire-
wood fell down in front of the asram
exhausted with fatigue and hunger. She
led him unhesitatingly, ignoring caste
restrictions. She would also refer to the
many inmates of the asram as her sons.
All the same her motherly love kept
alive her desire to provide Ramana with
some items which he was fond of be-
fore he was lured away from his home
by Arunachala. Ramana used to relish
appalams as a boy. She wanted to make
them without his knowledge, knowing
that he would remonstrate and not ac-
69\n--- 第83页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Ramana’s remonstration. In fact this was the beginning
of the asram kitchen and the Ramana family of an ever
widening circle of disciples and devotees.
Life on the hill was pretty tough for the mother. She
was the very first woman to live on the hill with all the
extremes of heat and cold, even lack of minimal com-
fort. She had renounced her home to be with her ascetic
son and she roughed it bravely. Ramana did his best to
help, particularly about her need for water to drink and
bathe. In the Virupaksha Cave water was scarce most of
the time. Hence Ramana would bring some water from
higher up on the hill for her to bathe in. As he recalled
later, “We had at that time two big kamandalams with us.
Each could hold a small potful of water. I used to bring
water in both of them. She would sit wearing a small towel
and I used to pour water on her head. This was how she
used to have her bath.”13
In the last years of her life, mother completely sur-
rendered herself to Ramana who had become her sadgu-
ru. Twice she had a glimpse of his divinity. “Once, even as
she sat before him he disappeared and she cried thinking
he had discarded the body. She saw him again in his usual
form. On another occasion, she had a vision of him gar-
landed by serpents, a veritable Siva. These visions helped
in infusing greater faith in him.”14 Above all it was life in
Ramana’s sanctifying presence, listening to his teachings,
and observing his daily life, which transformed her. Such
was her faith in Ramana that she used to tell him, “Even
if you throw away my dead body in these thorny bushes,
The gopurams over Sri Mathrubhuteshwara temple I do not mind. I must die in your arms.” She flatly refused
ing, ‘What my dear son, please help me a little.’ I was ada- to attend the housewarming function in her daughter
mant. She continued to call me again and again. Feeling it Alamelu’s new house lest she should be unable to get
was no use arguing anymore, I said, ‘All right, you make back. The mother endeared herself to each and every in-
these appalams. I will make another kind,’ and I started mate of the asram whom she served with single-minded
composing the Appalam Song. She used to sing a rice song, devotion.
soup song, and other such songs, all with Vedantic mean-
ings. No one appears to have written an appalam song. So Mother’s Liberation
I felt that she could learn another song. By the time the
preparation of the appalams was over, my song was also Victory unto the Holy Mother of Maharshi
ready. ‘I will eat this appalam (the song about appalams), Victory unto the Mother’s Mahasamadhi
and you eat those that you have made,’ I told her.”11 Victory unto the Linga consecrated by
The meaning of the song runs thus: “As the black gram Maharshi’s hands!
is ground in the quern, mixed with Pirandai juice, flat- Victory unto the Sacred Waters, new and all
tened, rolled, fried, and eaten, so should the ego be crushed redeeming!15
in the quern of self-enquiry, seasoned with good company, —Ganapati Muni
fried in the ghee of Brahman, with the fire of knowledge,
and become food of the Self.”12 Mother’s health started deteriorating from 1920. On the
However, her love for Ramana would not be defeat- 19th of May 1922, her condition became critical. After
ed. Slowly, at Skandasramam she started cooking, “first a his morning walk Ramana went to her room at about 8
vegetable, then a soup and so on. She used to wander all a.m., and sat beside her. Throughout the day, he had his
over the hill, gather something or the other, and say that right hand on her spiritual heart, on the right side of the
he likes this vegetable, that fruit.” She took no notice of chest and his left hand on her head. Ramana took on the
7700\n--- 第84页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
sacred assignment of liberating his mother from the tra- opened his eyes momentarily and the life force left the
vails of births. He had the power to bestow liberation. But body through them. After a few minutes Ramana got
he let her battle for it while at the same time he extend- up. When someone said that mother had passed away,
ed his gracious and invaluable support for it to fructify. Ramana immediately corrected and affirmed: “She did
What happened has been described by Ramana himself. not pass away. ‘Adangi vittadu, addakam’ (‘absorbed’)”
“The vasanas of the previous births and latent tendencies He added, “There is no pollution, let us eat.”18
which are seeds of future births came out. She was observ- While Ramana was seated beside the mother, direct-
ing one after another the scenes of experiences arising from ing her mind to the heart, Ganapati Muni and a few oth-
remaining vasanas. As a result of a series of such experi- ers began to chant the Vedas. Some others started doing
ences she was working them out.”16 Later someone asked Rama japa. Yet others were reciting “Aksharamanamalai”
Ramana to explain the process, to which he replied, “You (Marital Garland of Letters) composed by Ramana. The
see, birth experiences are mental. Thinking is also like that, whole atmosphere was surcharged with holiness.
depending on samskaras (tendencies). Mother was made Mother’s face was specially lustrous after liberation.
to undergo all her future births in that comparatively short It was like that of a yogini in meditation. The illumined
time.”17 At 8 p.m., her mind was absorbed in the heart Azhagammal was brought to the verandah and vibhuti,
and she was liberated from all tendencies which give rise the sacred ash, was applied on her forehead.
to future births. Even so Bhagavan waited for some time. Ganapati Muni ruled that mother’s body should
For in the case of his faithful attendant of many years, be buried and not cremated. He cited the authority of
Palaniswami, he had done the same thing. But after the Ramana himself who had categorically stated in 1917
subsidence of the mind in the heart, Palaniswami had that “liberated women are on a par with liberated men.”
71\n--- 第85页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Since no burial was allowed on the Arunachala Hill it was
decided to bury mother’s body at the foot of the southern
slopes of Arunachala, near Pali Tirtham.
Ramana sat beside his mother’s body the whole night
along with some devotees. Ramana also read the sacred
text Tiruvachagam written by the saint Manikavachagar
in praise of Lord Siva. Mother’s body was brought down
from Skandasramam to Pali Tirtham and the appropriate
rites commenced. The samadhi was constructed accord-
ing to the procedure laid down by the sage Tirumular in
his famous book Tirumandiram. Elaborate abhishekams
and pujas were performed. The mother’s body was placed
in a cloth bag in a yogic posture and lowered into the
samadhi. Ramana showered a handful of sacred ash and
camphor into the bag and others joined in.
Devotees decided that a mandala puja for forty-
eight days should be performed. Water needed for wor-
ship used to be brought from the nearby Pali Tirtham. A
miracle happened on the last day of the special worship.
That day it was discovered that there was a small pit with
Above: View of Sri Matrubhuteswara temple
Left: Mother’s samadhi at the Matrubhuteswara temple
7722\n--- 第86页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
clear water near the mother’s shrine itself. Ramana in- The project had the full blessing of Ramana. It in-
spected it and suggested that they should dig deeper and volved tremendous effort for fund-raising, which was
crystal clear water burst forth. Later on a well was dug on very difficult in those pre-independence years. Besides,
this spot and this has been a perennial source of water. Ramana had clearly prohibited any fund collection in
A thatched roof was put up over the samadhi and a the name of the asram. On one occasion his permission
hut constructed with mud walls. Niranjananda Swami was sought to seek funds for the construction of a lady’s
decided to stay near the shrine to ensure proper and regu- dormitory. He refused firmly, remarking, “We are sadhus
lar worship. In the following six months Ramana used to depending on God. Have you no shame? Must we stretch
come every day in the morning and stay till noon before out our hands and ask like common beggars?”20 However,
returning to Skandasramam. In December 1922, Ramana since the purpose of building mother’s temple was laud-
shifted permanently to the proximity of mother’s shrine. able and had Ramana’s approval the necessary funds were
The present Sri Ramanasramam grew around him. When received, though at a slow pace. The construction had to
asked as to why he shifted from Skandasramam, Ramana be spread over a period of ten years and was completed
replied, “The same power which brought me from Madurai only in 1949.
to Arunachala brought me here.” During this period between 1939 and 1949 while the
temple was being constructed, Ramana took keen inter-
Mother’s Samadhi and the Matrubhuteswara est in every aspect of the same. “At night when no one
Temple was moving about, he would walk around the construc-
tion consecrating it. That he took such a demonstrative
There are facts, which are not generally known, about the part in anything has deep significance. It was extremely
building which covered the mother’s samadhi. Originally, rare and doubted by many. But I myself am an eyewit-
the lingam had been covered with a small hut made out ness and can vouch its truth.”21 He evinced keen interest
of coconut leaves. in every aspect and gave appropriate instructions to the
“Some time in the mid-1920s a group of brickmakers sculptors and workers.
tried to bake some bricks near the asram.
When the bricks failed to fire properly, the
brickmakers abandoned them. Bhagavan,
unwilling to waste anything that was re-
motely useful, decided that the bricks could
be used to build a wall around the mother’s
samadhi. A few days later, in the middle
of the night, Bhagavan and all the resident
devotees arranged themselves in a line be-
tween the brick kiln and the samadhi. By
passing along the line they were able to
transfer all of them to the asram during the
night. The next day a wall was built around
the samadhi. Bhagavan himself did all the
work on the inside of the wall while a pro-
fessional mason worked on the outside. The
new building was completed by erecting a
thatched roof on top of the wall.”19
On September 1, 1939, the foundation
was laid for the construction of a temple
over mother’s samadhi. It was to be a grand
one on the lines of ancient temples built
in accordance with scriptural principles
(Agama Sastras). The date chosen has a spe-
cial significance because it was on that date,
forty-three years earlier, on September 1,
1896, that Ramana had reached Arunachala.
Ramana performing puja at mother’s samadhi
73\n--- 第87页 ---\nTimeless in Time
ter around. People were spell-
bound at the sight.”22 “After
the prescribed rites were over
Ramana went straight to the
new temple over mother’s sa-
madhi, touched with his hands
the linga and Sri Chakra which
was also to be installed and
then went round the temple
examining every detail.”23
On the penultimate night
he personally supervised the
installation of the idols in the
inner shrine. “It was an ex-
tremely hot night and with
three charcoal rotators for
melting the cement adding to
the heat, it must have been in-
Skandasramam tolerable inside the airless cave
of the inner shrine. But for about an hour and a
half, Bhagavan sat there telling the workmen what
to do.”24 On the night before the consecration,
Ramana stood inside the temple for five minutes
with both his hands on the linga and Sri Chakra,
charging them with his power.
Sadhu Arunachala (Major Chadwick) re-
fers to the special significance of all this, “I do
not think that anyone who has written about
Bhagavan and the asramam has remarked on
the extraordinary fact that here we have a temple
dedicated by a jnani. I do not pretend myself to
understand why he did so or what will be its con-
sequences. But having been consecrated in this
way, it must be a very sacred spot from which
spiritual power must radiate.”25 We may not be
able to completely comprehend the significance
of Ramana’s continued and intense interest in all
Room of Ramana’s mother at Skandasramam where she spent her last
hours of life in the arms of Bhagavan the aspects of the temple over his mother’s sama-
dhi, and the Matrubhuteswara linga (the Lord who has
The temple when completed was truly befitting a lib-
become mother). Yet this is a clear indication that she
erated illumni. The images in the temple had been carved
has become the symbol of the universal mother. The daily
under the direct supervision of an outstanding temple
worship offered here is a recognition of this fact.
sculptor of the time, Vaidyanatha Sthapati.
Reflecting on Ramana’s life and trying to identify
The Kumbhabhisekam (the consecration ceremony
certain landmarks, Kapali Sastri fixed a few of them.26
which is to be performed when a temple is newly built or
These have been selected with reference to their signifi-
renovated) was fixed for March 17, 1949. Waters had been
cance from the point of view of being stimuli for drawing
gathered from the Ganges and other sacred rivers for the
Ramana out and drawing people to him. The first was
purpose. The preliminary functions began on March 14
on November 18, 1907 when Ramana broke his silence
itself with the chanting of Vedic hymns and performance
of eleven years to explain the true import of penance to
of purificatory rites by hundreds of priests in the pres-
Ganapati Muni. The next began in 1916 when mother
ence of Ramana. “The resplendent face of Bhagavan, who
came to live with Ramana at the Virupaksha Cave. For it
was seated under the starry sky, was radiating cool lus-
was the beginning of the asram kitchen and the Ramana
7744\n--- 第88页 ---\nVirupaksha Years
family and the ever widening circle of his disciples and The significance of the temple is heightened by the
devotees. The next is May 19, 1922, when Ramana lib- fact that it is the best evidence of the great reverence giv-
erated mother by his potent grace, which she was ripe en to the mother by Ramana. It also exemplifies Ramana’s
enough to receive. Yet another significance of the year authoritative statement that a lady illumni is no differ-
1922 was that Ramana shifted from Skandasramam in ent from a male jnani. Above all, the temple is a standing
December that year, to the place near mother’s sama- symbol of Ramana’s grace which made mother’s libera-
dhi. It became the starting point of Sri Ramanasramam, tion possible.
which grew around him and mother’s samadhi. It
marked the steady growth of the awareness of his glori-
N
ous life and message.
75\n--- 第89页 ---\nTimeless in Time
76\n--- 第90页 ---\nSkandasramam Years
Section IV: Skandasramam Years
Skandasramam Years: 1916-1922 authority, but were treated by those who did it as their own
work. I did not tell them to build nor did I prevent them.
There used to be a perpetual scarcity of water at the In this manner, Skandasramam, Virupaksha Cave, and Sri
Virupaksha Cave. Hence Ramana and the devotees would Ramanasramam came into existence.”3
shift to the Mango Tree Cave nearby during the summer It will be seen that though the temple authorities were
months. The water problem became more acute after the owners of the eastern slope, they did not object to the
mother Azhagammal joined them. There was no water construction of Skandasramam because of the reverence
even for a proper bath. Ramana used to climb further up in which Ramana was held by everyone as a jnani. The
the hill every day and get the required water for mother’s manner in which this construction took place clearly in-
bath from a spring located higher up on the hill.1 dicates that the implementation and construction of the
One of the inmates, Kandaswami, noticed the trou- new asram had come into existence not because of any
ble which Ramana had to undergo day in and day out. He individual volition but by the divine sanction.
felt that the best solution would be to construct a proper Years later Ramana recalled the efforts of Kandaswami
asram for Ramana at a place near the water spring. He to construct Skandasramam. “Kandaswami was keen to
also felt that there was need for a more spacious place in build a separate asram for me. He inspected various places
view of the growing number of devotees. When he made on the hill and in the forest to select a site and finally select-
this request to Ramana, he did not object. Ramana had ed the present site and sought my approval. Since I did not
no plans of his own. For him everything happened ac- object, Kandaswami began converting what was a thick
cording to the divine plan. One can therefore say that all forest of prickly pear on the mountain slope. The result of
the happenings in Ramana’s life, including the construc- his labor is the asram, we see now.” Ramana added, “You
tion of Skandasramam, were in accordance with the di- cannot imagine the state of the site as it was originally.
vine plan. Kandaswami worked with almost superhuman effort and
This view is further strengthened by the fact that achieved with his own hands what even four people cannot
Skandasramam was located on the eastern slope of the do together. He removed all the prickly pear, reduced the
Arunachala hill which was traditionally the property stone and boulder to a level ground, created a garden, and
of the Arunachaleswara temple. This point is made by raised the asram. Four coconut trees were planted. To plant
Ramana himself, in the course of evidence, on com- them properly, Kandaswami dug huge square pits about
mission, which he gave in 1938 in defense of the temple 10ft deep. That would give you an idea about the labor he
authorities.2 Ramana stated, “I am
a devotee of Arunachaleswara. I
have composed a poem in Tamil
which says that Arunachala hill is
Iswara swarupa.… I lived in the
Virupaksha Cave for seventeen
years. I lived in Skandasramam for
six years. A building was construct-
ed in Virupaksha Cave but no writ-
ten permission was obtained for the
same. Skandasramam was complet-
ed in 1916. Because it was built by
a person known as Kandan, it came
to be known as Skandasramam.
No order was received from anyone
for this asram. Because I was stay-
ing there no one objected. On the
contrary they approved of it. These
constructions were not done on my
Skandasramam
77\n--- 第91页 ---\nTimeless in Time
put into the work. He was a strong, well-built man.”4 This by Ganapati Muni, were published later as Sri Ramana
asram is situated next to a perennial water spring and is Gita. Further it was at Skandasramam that many of
one of the most enchanting spots on the eastern slopes of Ramana’s lifetime disciples joined him. This list includes
Arunachala. Viswanatha Swami, Ramaswami Pillai, and Kunjuswami
Ramana’s stay at Skandasramam was studded with to mention a few.
many happy events. It was the first asram of Ramana. It While at Skandasramam, Ramana was in his best
was here that mother Azhagammal started cooking regu- state of health. His golden-hued body was glowing and
larly for the inmates, disciples, and the devotees. It is at fascinating. It is said that his body was so bewitching
this place that one of the most important scriptures of that one would have to resist the temptation to hug him
Ramana came to be recorded. In 1917, Ganapati Muni to one’s bosom. Above all Skandasramam has been hal-
and seven of his disciples questioned Ramana on many lowed by the liberation of mother Azhagammal through
aspects relating to the scriptures and spiritual practic- Ramana’s grace flowing from his hands. Small wonder
es. These questions and answers, recorded in Sanskrit that the place has a special and irresistible charm of its
own.
Kunjuswami has given a clear report of the daily rou-
tine at Skandasramam. “Sri Bhagavan’s mother would get
up around four in the morning and sing devotional songs.
Sri Bhagavan would be reclining. We would meditate.
Sri Bhagavan would go out at five and be back in about
an hour. We would begin to recite Aksharamanamalai
verses and finish by six. Sri Bhagavan would go for his
bath and we would also go out and finish our bath and be
ready to eat with Sri Bhagavan at eight. Sama Iyer would
get up at four in the morning, have his bath, and prepare
rasam and rice. He and Ramanatha Brahmachari used
to serve us. After the meal, Sri Bhagavan would sit out.
Some devotees would meditate, some would read books
like Ribhu Gita. The atmosphere was always very peace-
ful. Occasionally Sri Bhagavan would clarify the doubts
of the devotees.
“In the evenings we would sit before Sri Bhagavan at
6.30 p.m. and we would recite Aksharamanamalai again.
Sri Bhagavan used to close his eyes reclining on the pillow.
We would finish the recitation exactly at 7.30 p.m., when
we generally had our supper. Once in two or three days,
during the parayana, Sri Bhagavan would go into deep
meditation. Even at the end of the parayana, he would
not open his eyes. We used to call him gently, but Sri
Bhagavan would be completely oblivious of his surround-
ings. To wake him up, Perumalswami, Akhandananda,
Mastanswami, and I would take out some conches at the
asram and blow them. The sound of the conch used to
penetrate into him and bring him back to the external
world slowly. On such days, we would eat only at 9 p.m.
This would happen frequently. Even after moving to his
mother’s samadhi at the foot of the hill, this used to hap-
pen once in a week or ten days. Dandapaniswami used to
massage Sri Bhagavan’s feet to wake him but in vain. He
used to become aware of the external world only through
our blowing of the conches. It is said in Vasishtam that
Sri Krishna had to blow the conch to wake Prahlada from
his tapas.”5
7788\n--- 第92页 ---\nSkandasramam Years
A special incident re-
lating to a golden-haired
mongoose is also reported
when Ramana was stay-
ing at Skandasramam. It
appeared on a festival day
when a crowd of people
were climbing the hill. It
was an extraordinary mon-
goose, golden-haired and
without the usual black
spot on its tail. It joined
the party of pilgrims, went
up first to the Virupaksha
Cave, where Palaniswami
was taking his bath in the
spring. He stroked the ani-
mal, greeting it in the most friendly way. From there, the Sadhu Natanananda
mongoose climbed up to Skandasramam. Narrating this
incident, Ramana said: “Everyone was struck by its attrac- The story of Natesa Mudaliar, later known as Sadhu
tive appearance and fearless movements. It came to me, Natanananda, is one constantly yearning for the guru’s
climbed onto my lap, and rested there for some time. Then grace. One notices in his life dogged persistence for ob-
it raised itself up, looked about and moved down. It went taining Ramana’s grace.1 Though it took many years for
around the whole place and I followed it lest it should be him to get replies from Ramana, this was more than made
harmed by careless visitors or by the peacocks. Two of these good in later years when all his doubts were cleared di-
did look at it inquisitively, but it moved calmly from place rectly or through conversations which Ramana had with
to place until finally it disappeared among the rocks to the earnest devotees. His great contribution to Ramana lit-
south-east of the asramam.”6 erature was his work titled Upadesa Manjari or “Spiritual
N Instructions,” covering a wide range of subjects relating
to the practice of the Ramana Way. This work, considered
as one of the important prose works, is included in the
Collected Works of Sri Ramana Maharshi.
Sadhu Natanananda, who was then an
elementary school teacher, read with avid in-
terest the teachings of Swami Vivekananda
on the path of jnana. He then proceeded to
search for a suitable guru of the same caliber
as Sri Ramakrishna who had inspired Swami
Vivekananda. When he made enquiries every-
one said in one voice that such a guru, Bhagavan
Ramana, was living in Tiruvannamalai itself.
However he was told that it was not his practice
to give upadesa or instructions to any one. The
following year, in 1918, Natanananda made his
first attempt to get Ramana’s instructions. He
went to Skandasramam and sat in silence in
front of Ramana for quite some time, Ramana
remained silent. Disappointed, he went to
other gurus but suddenly realized that none of
them could compare with Ramana. Therefore,
in 1920, he wrote a letter to Ramana requesting
Ramana’s room at Skandasramam where he lived for many years before coming
down the mountain after the death of his mother him “not to be selfishly indifferent to the fate of
79\n--- 第93页 ---\nTimeless in Time
longing souls.”2 When no reply came he wrote another Natanananda renounced home only to regret it later and
letter, this time by registered post, conveying his resolve, return to lead a householder’s life.
“Whatever be the number of rebirths I have to endure, Subsequently he put down the conversations that
still I have resolved to get my upadesa from you and you took place between himself and Ramana. Some of his
alone. So for this purpose, if you fail to give me upadesa, devotees arranged and expanded his notes and showed
considering me too immature to receive your instruc- them to Ramana who expressed his appreciation. There
tions, you will have to be reborn I swear to this.”3 A few are seventy questions and answers covered in this ex-
days later he had a dream in which Ramana appeared to tremely useful book set out in four chapters.10
him and told him, “Do not constantly think of me.... First Q.1. What are the marks of a real teacher, sadguru?
secure the favor of God Maheswara, the Lord of the bull. A. Steady abidance in the Self, looking at all with an
First meditate on him and secure his grace. My help will equal eye, unshakable courage at all times, in all places and
follow as a matter of course.”4 He promptly put this advice circumstances, etc.
to practice and a few days later he received a letter from Q.2. What are the marks of an earnest disciple?
the manager of Skandasramam to the effect that Ramana A. An intense longing for the removal of sorrow and
would not reply to letters, but it was open to Natanananda attainment of joy.
to come in person and seek his clarifications. Actually the Q.3. What are the marks of the guru’s grace?
difficulty of Natanananda was also the same as would be A. It is beyond words or thoughts.
seen from the conversation which took place between
him and Ramana a year later. At that first meeting he
asked Ramana, “I wish to learn about and experience
what your grace is, as people differ in their account of
it.” Ramana replied, “I am always giving my grace. If you
cannot experience it, what am I to do?”5 It is only then that
Natanananda discovered that the upadesa of Sri Ramana
was on the lines of the ancient guru Dakshinamurti who
taught in silence.
Still unable to grasp the impact of Ramana’s silence,
Natanananda was very worried when he had another
dream in which Ramana said, “Let your vision be unified
and withdrawn from objects, external or internal. Make
your outlook equal and practice it.”6 After following this
upadesa he had another dream in which Bhagavan gave
him what he had been eagerly waiting for. In this dream
Ramana drew him near, placed his palm on his head and
then on the right side of his chest. Though received in a
dream, this was the traditional form of a guru’s initiation.
He was delighted.
Not being a scholar in scriptures, Natanananda would
sometimes doubt if this would make him ineligible for
Self-knowledge. Noticing his depression Ramana told
him, “Why are you anxious? What you seek is that which
is already at hand, ever existent.”7 Once he also assured,
“Grace is always flowing. It is not an occasional thing. It is
causeless and flows forever. It can be experienced by those
who meditate.”8
About 1926, Natanananda approached Ramana with
the intention of renouncing his home. Ramana advised
him against it. He told him, “There is no difference be-
tween domestic life and that of hermits. Just as you avoid
the cares of home when you are here, go home and try
to be equally unconcerned and unaffected at the circum-
stances amidst home life.”9 Notwithstanding this advice
View of Arunachaleswara temple from Skandasramam 8800\n--- 第94页 ---\nSkandasramam Years
Q.4. Is the state of “being still” a state involving effort A. Until the mind attains, effortlessly, its natural state
or is it effortless? of freedom from concepts. That is, till the sense of “I” and
A. It is not an effortless state. All mundane activities “mine” no longer exist.
which are ordinarily called effort are performed with the Q.8. If everything happens according to karma, how
aid of a portion of the mind and with frequent breaks. But is one to overcome the obstacles to meditation?
the act of communion with the Self, or remaining still in- A. Karma concerns only the out-turned mind and not
wardly, is intense activity which is performed with the en- the in-turned mind.
tire mind and without break. Sadhu Natanananda continued to stay opposite
Q.5. What is meditation? Sri Ramanasramam for many years after Ramana’s
A. It is abiding as one’s Self without swerving in any mahanirvana. No genuine seeker was denied his advice
way from one’s real nature and without feeling that one is about the practical aspects of self-enquiry. He wrote a
meditating. commentary in Tamil on the Five Hymns to Arunachala.
Q.6. What are the rules of conduct which an aspirant He also wrote a collection of incidents from Ramana’s life
(sadhaka) should follow? titled Ramana Darsanam.
A. Moderation in food, moderation in sleep, and mod- N
eration in speech.
Q.7. How long should one practice?
81\n--- 第95页 ---\nTimeless in Time
82\n--- 第96页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
Section V: Sri Ramanasramam Years
The Liberty Hall be coming in and going out continuously at all times of
the day. No one needed any permission to see Ramana,
Ramana had come to Arunachala “in obedience to his no appointments, no preferences, no fixed timings. One
Father’s command” as he had stated in the letter before would seize the best opportunity to clear his doubts, no
leaving his uncle’s home in Madurai. At that time he had matter whether it was immediately after the midday meal
no further need for any spiritual practice for he had be- or after dinner. For they were aware of his compassion,
come enlightened on July 17, 1896. The confrontation his willingness to help earnest seekers.
with death, leading to his discovery of his identity with Let us look at some descriptions about the scenes
the Self, firmly established him in steady wisdom. The which used to prevail. “One comes and praises him in
body too had served its purpose. But the irresistible call Sanskrit verse, another in Tamil prose, a third in Telugu
of Arunachala pulled him. His first act was to report, or Malayalam. Several go to pour out their woes into his
“Father I have come.” There his body could well have ears and seek solace in their heart-broken condition.
perished in the early months when he was in samadhi, Another wants the Maharshi’s blessings to win a law-
immersed in the infinite, oblivious of the body. Though suit.”2 A few ask for guidance on the path of vichara. A
he was unaware of the difference between night and day vast variety of people, each living in his own world, with
in his state, the divine protected his body through some their own set of problems, but united in their love for
sacred hands, because his role of universal guru was di- Ramana and confident in his love for them.
vinely ordained. Universal because his teachings could There is yet another graphic description which high-
be practiced by all seekers of truth regardless of their re- lights this “open to all” situation that existed. “Day by day
ligious affiliations, regardless of geographical locations, brings fresh indications of the greatness of the man. I am
regardless of any circumstances. learning to see the Maharshi’s way of helping others, an
This role began in November 1907 when Ganapati unobtrusive way, silent and a steady outpouring of heal-
Muni proclaimed it and christened him as Bhagavan Sri ing vibrations into troubled souls.”3 How else can one
Ramana Maharshi. In this role Ramana’s uniqueness, his explain the simultaneous presence of an illiterate peas-
incomparable universal love, stands out. ant and the most erudite scholar? “An illiterate peasant
The next overt act of compassion was his remaining and his family stay for a few hours hardly speaking, all of
at one place, Tiruvannamalai, during this entire period. them gazing in reverence, a prosperous judge is there for
The logic and importance of it can be seen in his expla- it is vacation for the courts, and a general group of medi-
nation to a young girl who asked him to accompany her tators.”4 Each is happy and in tune with the atmosphere
to Madras. “If I left this place, would not the visitors who thick with the aroma of Ramana’s presence. It was only
came expecting me here be disappointed? You have come at twilight time that Ramana would slip into his pow-
here with your parents to see me. If I were not here would erful and potent silence. His eyes would be wide open
you not be disappointed? And even if I leave this place and he would have a far away look as if he was gazing
what certainty … is there that I will reach your house? out of the window. Nothing could disturb those hours of
There would be so many calls and so many places to visit, intense peace. Every entrant into the hall would also be
that I might never see your house at all.”1 drawn into that dynamic silence. Their minds too would
Ramana stayed for nearly twenty years from 1927- become quiet, their questions would lose their relevance
1928 to 1949 in what is now called “Old Hall.” He used to and they would not mind whether these were asked or
sit, stretch, and sleep on the couch in a corner of this hall. not. Why disturb that spellbinding peace? Why not get
Above his couch the sparrows would continuously build immersed in it? So they would feel.
nests. The squirrels would run all over and freely move While this time would almost certainly be the true
on Ramana’s body. Monkeys would be on the lookout for hour of inwardness, during the daytime also quite of-
an opportunity to snatch the fruit offerings kept on the ten Ramana would just not be there except perhaps as a
stool near the couch. Cow Lakshmi would take over the physical form. The silence could be baffling to those who
place whenever she wanted to. There was no stopping her. were used to question and answer sessions or discussions
She knew this only too well and chose her own timings on various spiritual subjects. One newcomer, puzzled by
to be consoled, petted, or fed by Ramana. People would Ramana’s equipoise, questioned it. “Swamiji, many men
83\n--- 第97页 ---\nTimeless in Time
and women are now sitting before you in order to get imperishable?’ Ramana clarified, ‘As propounded by all
some instruction. You do not speak even a word. They and realized by all seekers after truth, abidance in the Self
too do not put any questions to you. They are all silently alone can make us know and realize it.’ 8 Srinivasa Gopala
sitting to learn something. What are you teaching them? Iyenger, an auditor, plies Ramana with questions. ‘How is
What are they learning from you? Please explain this se- it possible to attend to one’s business if he is to simultane-
cret.” Ramana remained silent. After some time, losing ously be meditative also?’ ‘No, business will be all the eas-
his patience, the visitor repeated the question. Smiling ier for you when your mind is strengthened and steadied
gently Ramana told him, “The question must be put ‘there.’ by meditation.… Your viewpoint will change.’ 9 A visitor
Why are you putting that question ‘here’?”5 from Andhra queries, ‘Should I not get away from wife
Many would seek and get counsel from Ramana for and family?’ ‘What harm did they do? First find out who
his equality was patent, his consideration obvious. There you are,’ was Ramana’s quick reply. Narasimha Swami has
would be no looking down on the questioner, no con- many lengthy interviews with Ramana. He was a lawyer
descension. The answer would depend upon the back- skilled in cross-examination, not ready to accept without
ground, earnestness, and open-mindedness of the ques- arguing till the end.10 Ramana convinces him that happi-
tioner. For he would not accelerate the pace nor disturb ness is inherent, one’s own, and capable of being univer-
one’s faith. But invariably there would be one common sally experienced. Ramana gives the reason for his failure
stream. The doubter’s attention would be turned to the to grasp this truth. ‘It is because it has long been your habit
core question of one’s identity and the source of “I”-con- to think of and identify yourself with other objects that you
sciousness. have never faced your “I.” You have always been exercising
For many years, one might say up to the mid-thirties, your intellect and never your intuition.’”11
the inmates were only few though there was a regular An anonymous devotee has described the atmo-
stream of seekers of truth and visitors who wished to have sphere which was then prevalent. “I had the good for-
Ramana’s darsan, having heard of his glory. This was be- tune and opportunity of watching him many times when
cause there was no infrastructure worth the name. There he was sitting with his eyes fixed like a statue for two or
were only two huts from 1922 to 1928. One was used as three hours at a time. Only the persons who have enjoyed
the living quarters and the other was used as kitchen- this calm and holy atmosphere can know about its im-
cum-dining hall. Then the “Old Hall” was constructed mense value.… Verily Maharshi who is always in sahaja
and gradually other buildings. Though few in numbers, state is God.… Though he is silent yet he teaches volumes
each one of the inmates of those early years was great in through his look, casual talk, and by his example. One
their own right and has contributed in a rich measure glance of his is enough to cross the ocean of samsara.”12
to the understanding of his life and teachings. Ganapati The thirties saw the growth of buildings in the asram,
Muni, Muruganar, Viswanatha Swami, Kapali Sastri, Yogi the cowshed, Vedic school, storeroom, and dining hall
Suddhananda Bharati, Sundaresa Iyer, Ramaswami Pillai, and later the asram dispensary. But for the devotees there
B.V. Narasimha Swami were the first group of what one was only the “Gents Common Guest Room.” Hence there
may term as the “Inner Circle” of devotees. After the visi- would be a rush of seekers in the weekends and vacations,
tors departed and also before breakfast in the early hours when they would make their own arrangements for their
of the morning they could literally plunder Ramana for stay. In the asram itself, permission to construct had been
themselves. “On the first Sivaratri that I was with him given to Yogi Ramiah, Swami Rajeswarananda, Major
in 1923, Bhagavan did not start out to walk around the Chadwick, and Devaraja Mudaliar. Muruganar lived in
mountain, as was his usual custom. Everyone else went the nearby grove Palakottu. The magnetism of Ramana
around the hill. Only four of us: Dandapani, Viswanathan, drew everyone notwithstanding the outward hardships.
myself, and one other devotee sat with him all through To be in the presence of Ramana, to listen to his soft
the night. We were all awake in a blissful state, which it is divine voice, to imbibe his firm and simple guidance
impossible to express in words.”6 was enough compensation to face these problems. In
Narasimha Swami has recorded a couple of scenes this they were encouraged by the certainty of Ramana’s
which would help to recall those years. “The evening accessibility, day in and day out, at all times of the day
was calm but cloudy and somewhat cool. Mr. A.S.K,7 and one might say at night as well in those years. Hence
Sub-Judge of Cuddalore, had come to see the Maharshi Narasimha Swami termed the Old Hall as the “Liberty
accompanied by two elderly ladies, his aunt, his cousin, Hall.” Everyone has the liberty to enter. And once they
and Raghupati Sastri, Pleader. He started the discussion entered its portals their liberty from bondage to the mind
by asking, ‘Has enquiring into the Real and unreal the and its attachments wouNld also be assured.
efficacy, per se, to lead us to the realization of the one
8844\n--- 第98页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
Robbers Worship Ramana and a few other ascetics also living on the hill. In spite
of it there was no incident of even any petty theft while
Ramana was staying there.
They are blinded by ignorance. But let us note
Hardly a couple of years after he had shifted to the
what is right and stick to it. Sometimes your teeth
asram, a robbery took place. It happened on June 26,
suddenly bite your own tongue; do you break them
1924. Though the incident took place about seventy five
out in consequence?
years ago, full particulars of the event are available be-
—Bhagavan Ramana
cause of an authentic record of it in the proceedings in
Ramana had shifted from Skandasramam to his mother’s the Criminal Court in Tiruvannamalai in Crime No.
samadhi in December 1922. By then he had spent twen- 52/1924.
ty-three years on the hill, first at the Virupaksha Cave It is difficult to understand why the robbers com-
and later at Skandasramam. Both these places were un- mitted this offence at all. At that time there were only
inhabited except for the inmates and devotees of Ramana two huts at Ramanasramam. One was in the front of the
85\n--- 第99页 ---\nTimeless in Time
samadhi shrine and the other to the north of it. There relevant facts have been clearly narrated by Ramakrishna
was hardly any sign of affluence. The author of Self- Swami in his First Information Report to the police.
Realization ventures a guess. He refers to the fact that Ramana, Kunjuswami, Mastan, Thangavelu Pillai,
even in those years the doors of the asram were open to Muniswami Iyer were sleeping there. In the northern hut
everyone. If any visitors arrived at the meal-time they a few others including the complainant were sleeping.
were sure to be fed. Besides there was also the practice While attempting to break the window the robbers
of feeding the poor. Possibly this could have given the persisted in shouting various threats. They also burst
impression that the asram was wealthy. The onlookers crackers to give the impression that they had firearms.
could not have been aware that the feeding took place At this stage Kunjuswami opened the door and brought
only because of Ramana’s unswerving principle of shar- Ramakrishna Swami into the samadhi hut for help and
ing equally whatever was available. they latched the door. Ramana dissuaded the other per-
Whatever be the reason, three persons chose to strike sons from facing the thieves saying, “let these robbers play
a little before midnight of that date. their role; we shall stick to ours. Let them do what they like;
Their attempt was to effect an entry by breaking open it is for us to bear and forebear. Let us not interfere with
the window on the southern side of the samadhi hut. The them.”1
8866\n--- 第100页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
Both of them pleaded with the robbers to come in At the request of the devotees Ramana would recall
by the door which they were ready to open provided no and explain in graphic detail many incidents in his life.
needless harm was done to the inmates. No request was However, we find that there has been no reference to this
made not to cause any property loss for there was none. incident by him. For all purposes it was a non-event for
These repeated exhortations went unheeded. Hence him, which was over once and for all. By this example
Ramana and those in the samadhi hut opened the door Ramana had demonstrated the need for strict adherence
for moving out to the northern hut leaving the samadhi by renunciates to the principle of ahimsa, non-injury.
hut free to the robbers to do what they liked. Before doing Its importance also springs from the fact that Ramana
so Ramana ensured that the weak dog Karuppan which accepted everyone as they were without any judgment.
was with them would remain unhurt. Kunjuswami was Hence he did not attach any importance to the cruelty of
sent to the town to report the matter to the local govern- the robbers. To him they were merely ignorant and mis-
ment authorities and also to get some help. guided men. Hence to them also his heart flowed in love
When Ramana and others were crossing over to the in equal measure.
N
northern hut one of the robbers cruelly beat each one of
them with his stick and Ramana also received a blow on
his left thigh. He told them, “If you are not satisfied yet you
may strike the other leg also.”2 Even though stone-hearted Ramana in the Kitchen
the robbers did not cause any further bodily harm.
Having gained entry into the samadhi hut the rob- When Ramana was staying in the Virupaksha Cave
bers ransacked everything in their disappointment at there was no regular cooking. The alms gathered by
not finding anything worthwhile. They asked for a hur- devotees would be shared by Ramana and those present.
ricane lantern which was provided. They broke open the Subsequently, when he shifted to Skandasramam, mother
almirah. All that they could get was a few strips of sil- began to cook regularly for Ramana and the devotees.
ver that adorned the images, a little rice, mangoes, and The fire lit by her is continuing with even greater vigor
about Rs.10 in cash which too belonged to a visitor. They since then.
continued their threats and wished to know where the In May 1922, after mother’s liberation, a hut
money was secreted. Ramana told them, “We are poor was constructed over her samadhi around which Sri
sadhus, living on alms and never have cash.”3 They had Ramanasramam has grown since then. Ramana’s
no alternative except to accept the statement for the stark younger brother Nagasundaram, who had joined him
reality was before them. at Skandasramam, shifted to the samadhi where he
In the meantime Ramakrishna Swami saw the swol- would cook the required offerings. He was known as
len left thigh of Ramana, who humorously remarked Chinnaswami or the younger swami. He was an expert
that he too had received adequate poosai, which means cook. Later, in December 1922, Ramana also shifted
in Tamil both beating and worship. Unable to bear the to mother’s samadhi site and regular cooking had to
sight of the physical harm done to his guru, Ramakrishna commence. This was in the hands of Chinnaswami,
Swami seized an iron instrument nearby and sought per- Dandapani Swami, and a few others. It would appear
mission to go after them. Ramana held him back advis- that gradually the cooking was taken over by Ramana
ing, “We are sadhus. We should not give up our dharma. himself. He commenced the work with a team of regular
If you go and strike them some may die. That will be a assistants, also supported by a few devotees who were
matter for which the world will justly blame us and not the present at that time. Under his guidance the kitchen
thieves. They are only misguided men.”4 The following day became a regular school for teaching the inner way of life
many police officials came to enquire and recorded the and strong sense of equality. As a rule the kitchen staff
details. Ramana did not even mention about his injury. would ripen in wisdom.
Only the others reported what had happened. Later the Ramana would be in the kitchen between 2.30 a.m.
robbers were apprehended and tried for offences falling and 4 a.m. He would begin by cutting vegetables along
under the Indian Penal Code. One of them was addition- with the kitchen staff and devotees. Then he would pre-
ally charged for causing hurt. The offence was commit- pare sambar and chutney for breakfast and occasionally
ting robbery and hurt. The sad part was that the three some extra dishes also. He would not permit any special
accused, Ayya Kannu, Kuppan, and Subbarayan were all attention being bestowed on him. The work included
only twenty-five years of age. The first two were sentenced grinding and other manual jobs. When the dishes were
to one-year rigorous imprisonment and the third to two ready he would taste a little of each and give the co-work-
years as he had hurt them physically as well. ers a sample to ensure that the dishes were tasty. After
87\n--- 第101页 ---\nTimeless in Time
pany we would always be energetic and ready to take on
any amount of work.”3
Santamma was from Ramanathapuram and had
been attracted to Ramana thanks to Muruganar, who
hailed from the same place and gave her a photograph
of Ramana. She had a strong spiritual bent of mind. At
her very first meeting she prayed to Ramana to destroy
her mind. Ramana told Muruganar, “Ask her if there
is such a thing as mind! If so, what is its form? Does it
have a moustache and a beard?”4 She would leave the
asram reluctantly. She told Ramana, “Here I am filled
with peace. At home my mind is constantly disturbed.”
Ramana advised her to stay till her mind became steady.
He added, “Thereafter wherever you go your mind would
be peaceful.”5 She mentions how once a devotee com-
plained that he had to stay elsewhere whereas the in-
mates of the asram could receive Ramana’s grace in
full measure. Ramana assured him, “The Lord always
remains close extending his protection to those who have
surrendered to him. The frog stays near the lotus. But it
is only the bees which suck the honey of the flowers how-
ever far they may come from.”6
Another kitchen mate, Subbalakshmi Amma, was
finishing his work Ramana would return to the hall to be
keen on meditation and would ply Ramana with ques-
in time for Vedic chanting.
tions. Once she asked him about the nature of the Self.
It may be mentioned that Ramana was a strict disci-
Ramana advised, “Abide in the Self, free from thoughts in-
plinarian. For he would not tolerate the least sloppiness.
stead of enquiring about the nature of the Self.”7 She would
The allotted duties had to be performed by understanding
fret and fume about the absence of time to meditate be-
the requirements. One of the volunteers, Subbaramayya,
cause of excessive kitchen work. Ramana told her, “If you
who was in charge of spicing the dishes with salt, was
identify yourself with the body, you are bound to dualities.
late one day. Ramana gently told him, “Since you were ab-
Work will appear difficult. Even if we free ourselves from
sent, I thought of you at the moment of adding some salt
and that is the reason for this excess.”1 The reprimand for work, would the mind cease to wander? It does not let us
sleep in peace. It keeps wandering as in dreams.”8
unpunctuality went home. Ramana once ex-
plained to one of the kitchen staff the need for
care. “All this trouble is for you people. When
I sit for lunch, Echammal will bring one dish,
Mudaliar Patti another, some other devotee a
third preparation specially for me. I just mix
what they all bring with what you prepare and
eat.”2
The touch of Ramana’s gracious hands
would make the dishes nectarine. Sampoor-
namma, one of the kitchen staff, recalls, “He
would patiently guide me in every detail about
what to cook and how to cook. He used to lay
stress on proper grinding, the need to put
a lid on vegetables to make them tasty, and
so on.… He was quite strict and would not
countenance any deviation from the instruc-
tions.… Because of his care for us even the
toughest jobs would seem light. In his com-
The asram dining hall as it is today; food is being served on banana leaves on the floor in the
traditional Indian way
88\n--- 第102页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
All the kitchen staff would feel privileged to be able tunity. So, he was always hawk-eyed about any attempt
to work with Ramana. One of them remarks, “The privi- at such preferential treatment. Share and share alike was
lege of companionship of Lord Krishna was given to the golden rule which he observed to the last day. A few
gopis of Brindavan. The same fraternity with God was instances would be illustrative.
our blessing in the Ramanasramam kitchen.”9 Was he not Bhagavan suddenly stopped drinking buttermilk.
compassionately compensating them for their inability to Devaraja Mudaliar, who used to sit near Bhagavan, no-
join the other devotees in the Old Hall? ticed this and asked: “Bhagavan, we eat all the items
Ramana stopped working in the kitchen in the late sumptuously. But you keep giving up one item or the
thirties. Thereafter also he would spend some time with other. How can we bear this?” Bhagavan replied, “They
the kitchen staff by chatting with them after his meal, are only too ready to give me extra helpings. But when it
teaching them new verses and songs, and generally mak- comes to the devotees their hands are paralyzed.” On en-
ing them happy.10 quiry Devaraja Mudaliar learnt that Bhagavan was pro-
N
voked into making this remark because a young girl from
Bangalore had been refused extra quantity of sambar
which she had asked for. The kitchen workers had their
Equality in the Dining Hall human weakness too. They looked after the old devotees
and those sitting near Bhagavan well. Yet, newcomers
The equality which Ramana insisted upon in the din- and those seated farther away were sometimes neglected.
ing hall is an aspect of his universal love. He was fully Repeated statements of Ramana that service to his devo-
aware that the kitchen staff and the devotees would show tees was the best form of service to him would be of no
him preferential treatment if given the slightest oppor- avail. Hence he would stop eating or drinking some item
89\n--- 第103页 ---\nTimeless in Time
to draw the pointed attention of the kitchen-staff to im- therefore unwittingly transgress the rule of equality only
partiality.1 to be pulled up by Ramana. In the beginning of her
One of the nephews of Suri Nagamma, Tilak, had stay at the asram, one such kitchen-helper, Santamma,
come from London. While leaving he brought an offer- served an extra helping on Bhagavan’s leaf-plate. That
ing to the dining hall. Bhagavan was served first and then night Ramana called her and asked, “Why do you serve
the others. Bhagavan noticed the attendants cutting the me more of the curry than the rest? Have you come all the
bananas into small bits to the last few persons. Bhagavan way here to learn this. If you serve more to others and less
said in disgust, “This is what I don’t like. Why do you serve to me, I would be happy. If you show the devotees the same
me when you cannot give the same quantity to all people? love as you are showing to me, then your love for me too
That is why I am telling you. If you serve Bhagavan after will grow.”3
you serve all others, there will be equal distribution. If by Another lady helper, Subbalakshmamma, also was
chance nothing remains, it does not matter if I do not get given a similar lesson by Ramana. She noticed that
anything; if all eat, I am satisfied even if I do not get my Ramana used to add a little quantity of sweet buttermilk
share.”2 to his rasam rice. For a few days at a stretch however,
The ladies who were serving in the kitchen had to there was only sour buttermilk available in the asram.
be particularly careful because to them Bhagavan was Then, one day someone brought a little quantity of sweet
the embodiment of God and their sadguru. They would buttermilk. Thinking that Bhagavan ate so sparsely and
therefore it would not be wrong to give
him this item even though it was not
equally available to others, she served
him. “All are equal here,” he said. She re-
ports another incident. Ramana used to
take an extra helping of rasam by cupping
his hands. One day he refused. When
asked by her, he said, “In order to give me
a little more rasam, you are keeping others
waiting.”4 On one occasion Sri Sundaram,
a kitchen helper, noticed that the vegeta-
bles in the sambar had not been cooked
properly. When he served Ramana he
carefully avoided the pieces in the sambar.
However, nothing could escape Ramana’s
observation. He told Sundaram, “If some-
thing is considered unpalatable for me, it
should be considered the same for others
also.”5
In the later years when Bhagavan’s
health deteriorated, many devotees would
press him to take healthier food for their
sake. They would argue that the others
could eat any number of dishes whereas
Ramana ate very little even though he was
in need of nourishing food. He would in-
variably refuse such requests. A humor-
ous incident took place once in regard to
this. A devotee suggested that Ramana
should regularly drink some orange juice,
to which he replied, “How could we afford
to have such a luxurious diet? For us there
can only be a poor man’s rations.”6 That
devotee told him that the cost was not
much for one glass to be given to Ramana.
9900\n--- 第104页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
Ramana said, “No, no, we require about two hundred tum- One Ramanatha Brahmachari had come to Bhagavan
blers of juice. Do you want me to gulp down the drink alone when he was very young and was deeply attached to him
when all of you are waiting empty handed? Moreover how from his Virupaksha days. In the early twenties, there
can poor people like us provide two hundred tumblers of was a severe outbreak of plague in Tiruvannamalai.
this juice daily?”7 Similar overtures by even longstanding
Some of the inmates of Skandasramam, where Ramana
devotees would be instantly scorched because what was
was staying, died from plague. Ramanatha Brahmachari
not equally shared was like poison to Ramana.
also developed plague boils and was in a miserable con-
Sometimes dosas would be prepared for breakfast.
dition when some of them burst. Some of the devotees
When Bhagavan was doing kitchen work he would be
thought of a ruse to protect Ramana from contamina-
given one for tasting and another would be tasted by oth-
tion of plague. They suggested circumambulation of
ers. At breakfast Ramana would insist on taking only one
the hill. On the way they told Ramana not to return to
dosa since he had one earlier in the morning. For him the
rule of sharing equally was never to be broken under any Skandasramam. They said that they would look after
circumstances.8 Ramanatha Brahmachari while Ramana could stay else-
N where. When Ramana heard this he retorted, “What a
wonderful idea! He came to me as a boy with complete
faith in me. Is it proper for me to stay here leaving him
Kinder You Are Than One’s Own Mother there? If you are so afraid of plague, you may all stay here.
I will go and stay with him. When you bring food for him,
Ramana’s love for all creation was natural and spontane- you can bring some for me also.”2
ous and was not a cultivated quality of mind. A common
misconception is that when one attains
Self-knowledge, since there is a total ab-
sence of difference in perception, indi-
vidual love is not possible. Ramana has
often pointed out the mistake in this. The
jnani is aware of individual differences
whether one is short, fair complexioned,
a woman or man and so on. Besides he
is fully aware of the shortcomings of
persons who come within his ambit.
At the same time he is conscious of the
underlying essential quality of life as the
one Self. His life is therefore not based
on give and take. It is only “human
love which requires human meriting.”
Expectations and attachments would
not be there. His love would be total
and unqualified in respect of each and
every person. Therefore some devotees
used to feel that “Ramana alone knows
what it is to love.” Others would say, “It
is hard to describe the wonder of how
Bhagavan bound us all with his love.”
Words would never pass between him
and some of the long-standing devotees.
Nevertheless they knew that Bhagavan
loved them and that his grace was show-
ered on them. “We lived together like a
huge family with Bhagavan at the center
guiding us and shedding his grace on
all.”1
91\n--- 第105页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Once Chadwick, an inmate of the asram, was down the avial. Go to the kitchen and bring some on a plate.”
with fever. Bhagavan asked one of the devotees, “How is When it was brought Ramana stood next to him while
Chadwick now?” The devotee replied, “I do not know; I he was eating throwing light from his torch till the last
have not seen him today.” Ramana replied, “Please go and morsel had been consumed.5
see him at once. He has left his country and traveled thou- Ramana’s classmate Rangan, while proceeding to
sands of miles making us his own. Should we not take care Madras in search of a job, halted at Skandasramam.
of him and look after his needs?”3 Ramana told him, “Men go here and there and some-
Strange paradox that the spiritual colossus totally un- how manage. What arrangements have you made for
concerned about his own body should concern himself your wife and children at home?” On being assured that
with very small details of his devotees’ lives. “Kunjuswami this was done, he left it at that. Later it transpired that
had to go to his native place and did not have money to this provision had been inadequate. When Rangan re-
buy himself some food on his journey. Ramana packed turned Ramana expressed his concern about it.6 Soon,
puris for him for the journey. Narayana Iyer was return- by Ramana’s grace Rangan got a good job and the family
ing home. The cooks were tired and asleep. Ramana problems were solved. During a certain period astrolo-
roasted almonds for him.”4 gers had predicted the worst for Rangan. At that time
Long after Annamalai Swami had left the service of Ramana kept him with himself and would always cau-
the asram, one night at 8 p.m., he was walking at the back tion him to return at night. He would remark, “Come
of the asram. When Bhagavan saw him, he told an atten- back straight without loitering anywhere or spending the
dant, “When Annamalai Swami was here he used to enjoy night in town.”
9922\n--- 第106页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
At the time when the asram hall was being construct- When Ramana was in Virupaksha Cave the sum-
ed, the attendants also used to carry stones to the site. mer months used to be very hot and there would be no
One day an attendant Rangaswami’s finger was crushed water. Therefore he would shift to the Mango Tree Cave.
when a stone fell on it. Till the finger was fully healed, In those days the caste system was severely enforced.
Ramana himself took over the work of carrying stones.7 Women of lower caste with heavy loads used to be thirsty
N and hungry by the time they had collected grass. This is
what Ramana once said in a reminiscent mood about
them. “Poor people, they start from their homes early in
the morning after taking a little gruel (kanji), go up the hill
Identification With the Poor, Humble,
and secure a head load of grass. As soon as they come to the
and Meek
cave they throw down their bundles, bend down and say,
‘Swami, Swami, first throw a vesselful of water down our
Though there was no sense of difference for Ramana spines.’ I used to stand on the verandah there and when I
one often wonders whether he had a special soft corner threw water on them as desired, they used to recover from
for the poor, humble, and meek. There are many heart- their exhaustion, saying, ‘Oh, how good this is!’ Then, cup-
warming instances where he would so completely be one ping their palms they used to drink water until their thirst
with them. Then one sees the all-embracing nature of his was satisfied, wash their faces, take some rest in the shade
love. of the trees, and then depart. They alone could experience
93\n--- 第107页 ---\nTimeless in Time
the happiness of it all. It is only when one experiences the cave with the hope that the Swami would supply water. We
oppressiveness of the heat that one knows the relief of the were not cooking at that time. If any day we did cook, I
coolness of water. poured a lot of water into the rice while cooking, took out
“I knew they would be coming at that hour and so the gruel, poured it into the pot, mixed water with it liber-
would sit there with the water ready. What could they do? ally, and added salt. If dry ginger was available I would
They should not touch the water in the Mulaipal Tirtham mix it in also. By the time they came, the gruel water would
(holy tank) and there is no water anywhere else on the hill. be quite cool. When a tumblerful of it was poured into their
The heat is unbearable. They cannot have food unless they hands, they used to drink it like nectar and go away. The
sell the grass and get some money. They have children at taste of that gruel and the happiness of drinking that water
home. They must reach home quick to look after them. they alone could know.”1
What can they do, poor people! They used to come to the In 1943, the Old Hall used to be overcrowded with
visitors and devotees. The chil-
dren who came with the women
dirtied the place and there were
no proper arrangements for
cleaning. The attendants, in a
mood of disgust, suggested that
the women could sit outside the
hall. Bhagavan queried, “If ladies
are to sit outside, why not the men
too? When there is no work in the
hall even for Bhagavan, it will
be alright if I sit under the tree
which is opposite the hall. Then
there will be no trouble or worry
for anybody for whatever the chil-
dren may do.”2 Consequently the
attempt to separate the women
was given up. A separate door
was opened to ease the over-
crowding of people.
On special occasions like
jayanti and mahapuja originally
only after the poor people were
fed, would eating in the dining
hall commence. Later it was
changed such that when the
poor started to eat their food it
could be served in the hall also.
One day Bhagavan noticed that a
poor man had not got any share
of food. Next day when the gong
was struck, Bhagavan got up and
went to the tree where the poor
people were gathered and said,
“If you will not give them food
first, I will not come to the din-
ing hall at all. I will stand under
the tree and stretch out my hands
for food like them and when I am
given a bowl of food I will eat it,
9944\n--- 第108页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
go straight to the hall, and sit.”3 Then the old practice was advisable. Thinking that they had persuaded him out
revived. of it, the two friends set out on their own only to find
This happened in 1948. The hall was full of visitors. Ramana trailing behind them, slowly, along with his at-
When the lunch bell rang, everyone went to the dining tendant Rangaswami. Somehow Ramana managed to
hall. Bhagavan got up slowly because of the pain in his reach Skandasramam, with their help, after three gruel-
knees. Near the door he noticed a shepherd standing ing hours in the hot sun. Why he should have done so
with an earthen pot on his shoulders. He said “Oh! It is was a mystery to them.
you Chinnappa. If you have come to see me, you must have Soon they discovered the reason. A solitary ma-
brought koozhu. Why do you hesitate? Pour some into my son was doing some odd jobs there. Ramana told him,
hands.” Then he cupped his hands and began drinking it “I came for your sake. Your prayers dragged me here.”
slowly as if it were nectar. “In the meantime one of the Ramana himself explained what his prayer was. “As you
devotees came from the dining hall and protested, ‘Oh! know, four days ago, in connection with the raising of
Bhagavan you are feasting here and there we are waiting pillars for the New Hall they had a special worship. With
for you.’ Ramana told him, ‘Who looked after me when I
was on the hill? It is only the shepherds.’”4
It was 3 a.m., Ramana and a few other devotees were
working in the kitchen. A group of women and children
wished to see Ramana and were told that it was not pos-
sible at that hour. On hearing this Ramana intervened
remarking, “Poor people! Why should they go away dis-
appointed? Tell, them to come to the back door and I will
meet them there.” Ramana stood at the doorstep and the
party bathed his feet with their tears of joy.5
One afternoon the attendants brought a large quan-
tity of sweets given by devotees for distribution. Just then
an old lady also came with a packet of dosais (pancakes)
enclosed in a banyan leaf. She went straight to Ramana,
overruling the objections of the attendants, and gave
those dosais to him saying, “Swami take these dosais. I
am sorry I have nothing better to bring.” Noticing the fact
that she was upset Ramana told her gently, “Grandma,
they are little children. They do not know what is what.
Please do not mistake their remarks. With what flour did
you prepare these dosais? Are none of your brother’s sons
looking after you properly? Did you come walking, or in a
cart?” As he made these affectionate remarks, he started
eating what was given to him. He ate all the dosais with-
out even leaving a bit. Some attendants protested remark-
ing, “Instead of eating those dosais, which are not prop-
erly roasted, why not give them to us and eat the sweets?”
Ramana told them, “Oh! those sweets you think will be
much more tasty than these dosais? If you want, you eat all
the sweets. These dosais are enough for me.”6
While attempting to save a squirrel from a dog,
Ramana accidentally broke his collarbone. It took
some time for the collarbone to heal. This accident also
weakened him considerably. It had hardly healed, yet
Ramana wanted to join a staunch devotee, T.P.R, and
his friend, when they informed him that they were go-
ing to Skandasramam. It was immediately after lunch.
Naturally the two devotees were afraid that the hot sun
and Ramana’s frail health would make such a trip in-
95\n--- 第109页 ---\nTimeless in Time
the doctor’s permission the sthapati had taken me for this D: Then there is no difference between yourself
function. Many had come. One of them was this mason. and myself, that man over there, my servant. Are
He thought, ‘How lucky are these people who are construct- all the same?
ing this hall! To see their work Bhagavan himself has come. R: All are the same, including those monkeys.
How will Bhagavan come and see the work, which I am do- D: But the monkeys are not people? Are they not
ing at Skandasramam, with such patient care? It is a year different?
since he has come to Skandasramam. It would be too much R: They are exactly the same as people. All are the
to hope that he would do so now. How wonderful would it same in One Consciousness.
be if he did’”7 —Mercedes de Acosta
Ramana then personally inspected the work.
Ramana’s identity with all creation, with all life, was to-
Understandably the mason was in the seventh heaven.
tal. There were no “others” for him. While he was fully
N
aware of the differences in forms, he would at all times
be simultaneously aware that behind each form there
was only one power, the power of Consciousness. As he
One Consciousness
had explained to Uma Devi the Polish devotee, the jnani
sees the basis of all as the screen is to the movement of
Monkeys pictures on it, the paper to the print on it, the cotton be-
hind the cotton cloth. To Ramana the objects were only
D: Does one who has realized the Self lose the sense
consciousness and forms. He would never miss out on
of “I”?
the essential unity of life notwithstanding the difference
R: Absolutely.
in appearances. As a result
Ramana was a loving friend of
all life, human, animal, plant,
and other. His compassionate
heart would make him plead
on their behalf whenever he
noticed or felt any kind of dis-
crimination or harm to them.
Between 1899 and 1922,
Ramana was staying in the
various caves of the Arunach-
ala hill but mainly at Virupak-
sha and Skandasramam. The
hill abounded in monkeys. Ra-
mana would refer to it as their
kingdom and to humans as
intruders. Even after he shift-
ed to Ramanasramam on the
southern slope of Arunachala,
his jungle hermitage was also
the monkeys’ home. Ramana
was very observant. His love
of all life made him study the
general behavior and attitude
of the monkeys who were
daily visitors in large numbers
to Virupaksha Cave and Skan-
dasramam. As a result he knew
about their way of life, their
sports, their system of gov-
ernment, their attitudes and
priorities. Often two monkey
9966\n--- 第110页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
groups would come to him to
arbitrate and his decision would
be readily accepted.
Generally monkeys are
looked down upon and one re-
fers to their restlessness and
mischief when talking about the
mind. The mind is referred to as
a “monkey.” However, Ramana
would always talk about their
strengths, as would be seen from
his remarks, “I have known some-
thing about their organization,
kings, laws etc. Everything is so
perfect, so much intelligence be-
hind it all.” He would say, “I even
know that tapas is not unknown
to monkeys. A monkey whom we
used to call Mottaipaiyan was
once oppressed and ill-treated by
a gang. He went away into the
forest for a few days, did tapas,
acquired strength, and returned.
When he came and sat on a
bough and shook it, all the rest of
the monkeys, who had previously
ill-treated him and of whom he
was previously afraid, were now
quaking before him. Yes, I am
clear that tapas is well known to
monkeys.”1
On one occasion, when some of the big monkeys nursed him back to health. He enjoyed many privileges.
snatched away the fruits brought by a devotee, Bhagavan He would be given a plate right next to Ramana. He was
said, “They take their share of the fruit, why be angry with a scrupulously clean eater. “He was very sensitive though,”
them? That is the concentrated look or the lakshya drishti. says Ramana. “One day for some reason he threw out some
Some of them will find out where the fruit is kept and in the food, and I chided him saying, ‘What! Why are you scat-
twinkling of an eye, all of them would come and take away tering food?’ He at once hit me over the eye and slightly
their share. Their attention is always on the fruit. That is hurt me. As a punishment he was not allowed for some
why in Vedantic parlance, monkey’s look is given as an il- days to approach me. But he cringed and begged hard, and
lustration of the concentrated look.”2 regained his blissful seat. That was his second offence. On
Once a devotee brought a big basket of mangoes the first occasion Nondi felt irritated at his own cup of hot
from his garden for being offered to Bhagavan and said, milk being taken near my lips to be cooled when he struck
“The monkeys are plucking the mangoes one by one. So me over the eye, but as there was no serious hurt and he
we hurriedly plucked all of them and brought them here.” at once affectionately re-occupied my lap and cringed as
Bhagavan said smilingly, “Oh! Is that so? The monkeys much as to say, ‘Forget and forgive: let bygones be bygones,’
take the fruit one by one, while the people take them in one he was excused.”4
lot. What the monkeys do is petty theft but what we do is Over the years we have a number of interesting stories
regular looting.”3 relating to the monkeys and also stories which show the
The story of a lame monkey which was looked after great compassion which Ramana had for monkeys. One
by Ramana is interesting. An elder member of his tribe day a male monkey snatched some fruits and ran away.
bit him so badly that he became lame. He was left near However a female monkey with her babe on her breast
Skandasramam to let him die gradually. But Ramana came near the fruits and was immediately shouted away.
97\n--- 第111页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Ramana said, “It is a mother with a child. Why not give that “at this rate nobody would be able to remain in the
her something and send her away?” But he was not suf- asram.” Ramana laughingly remarked, “In that case the
ficiently audible, and so the monkey got frightened, went monkeys would have Bhagavan all to themselves.”7
off, and hid herself in a tree. “Bhagavan, full of concern
said, ‘Is this fair? We call ourselves sannyasins, but when Squirrels
a real sannyasi comes we drive him away without giving
Ramana was so fond of squirrels,
peacocks, monkeys, and other
animals that when he was shifted
to the New Hall to accommodate
the growing number of devotees,
he found it hard to accept the
change. He was concerned that
it practically meant the denial of
entry to these animal friends. He
told his attendant Sivananadam,
“Do you see this? How can they,
the squirrels, come here?” When
the attendant pointed out that it
was for Bhagavan’s comfort that
the change had been made, he
remarked, “That’s alright. If we
look to our comforts is it not at the
expense of the sufferings of others?
Squirrels, monkeys, peacocks, and
cows have no chance of coming
here.” As soon as it was evening,
he sent some of his attendants to
feed the squirrels, monkeys, and
peacocks who came to the asram.
He remarked, “They may perhaps
him anything. How unfair! We want to eat for years and think that the Swami has given them a slip and gone else-
live. We store things in a room, lock it and keep the keys where. Please go. What a pity! Go, at least give them some
with us. Has the monkey got a house? Can it put anything food and come back.”8 After the attendant came back, he
by for the morrow? It eats whatever it can get and sleeps on once again enquired, “Have you fed them all? They will
whatever tree available. It carries the child under the belly think that the Swami has deserted them and has gone to
wherever it goes until the child is also able to walk about a better place to sit there so that he alone can be happy.
when it leaves the child to itself. Who is a real sannyasi, the Perhaps they thought I had forgotten them. There is no
monkey or ourselves? That is why the male monkey took room for them here.”9
its share on the way itself. That was a male and could do it
with impunity. This is a female. What can she do?’ So say- Peacocks
ing Bhagavan began calling that monkey cajolingly. The
monkey came on to the side of the couch and stood there. In April 1947, the Rani of Bhavanagar presented a white
In an endearing manner Bhagavan gave her all the fruits peacock to the asram. Initially Ramana did not accept the
she wanted and sent her away.”5 gift because he felt that there might be quarrels between
Once a monkey tried to bring her newborn baby the white peacock and the colored peacocks which were
through a window near Ramana’s couch. The attendants already in the asram. Besides it had to be protected from
were preventing her. Ramana chided them as follows, the attacks of cats. As it usually happened, the donors
“Don’t all of you bring your newborn babes to me? She also never took back their gifts to the asram. Hence the white
wants to do so. Why should you prevent her?”6 peacock stayed. It would move about freely in the presence
One day as usual someone complained to Ramana of Ramana enjoying the feed given by him. Sometimes,
about the nuisance created by the monkeys and added however, the peacock would run away somewhere else
9988\n--- 第112页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
and it had to be brought back by the attendants. Then
Ramana would place his hand on its neck, and stroking
it up to the heart with his other hand, would say, “You
naughty chap, where did you go? How can we manage to
look after you, if you go away? Please don’t. There will be
cruel animals elsewhere. Why not stay on here?”10 Thus
he cajoled it. Sometimes this white peacock would listen
intently to music on the radio. When someone remarked,
“See how carefully it is listening!” Bhagavan would point
out, “Peacocks are fond of music, especially if it is from the
flute.”11
Once referring to this white peacock someone said,
“Though this peacock is white, it is the other peacocks
that are really beautiful.”12 Pointing to the peacock
Bhagavan said, “If it is like this, it has a beauty of its own.
Those peacocks have many beautiful colors. This is pure
white without any mixture of other colors. That means it do not have so many colors at birth. They have only one
is suddha sattva (pure Self), without the mixture of other color. As they grow up, they get many colors. When their
gunas (attributes). See, in Vedantic language, the peacock tails grow, they have any number of eyes. See how many
also can be taken as an example. Even the other peacocks colors and how many eyes! Our mind also is like that. At
birth there are no perver-
sities. Subsequently, there
will be many activities and
ideas, like the colors of the
peacock.”13
Sometimes the con-
versation would revolve
around the past when he
would recall some of his
experiences with peacocks.
Referring to one particular
peacock, which used to be
with him at Skandasramam,
he said, “When I was in the
Melasramam (Skandasra-
mam), there was one pea-
cock which would come to
me daily from the town and
remain there for prolonged
periods. The owner used to
come and take him home.
One day the owner came as
usual and tried to take the
peacock, but in vain. The
peacock persisted in coming
often and remaining with
me. The owner, perhaps, lost
his patience and suddenly
one day he burst out rather
humorously, ‘Swami! Give
me money and take this
peacock. Of what use is it to
99\n--- 第113页 ---\nTimeless in Time
me when it does not stay with me but is always found only tee, Rangaswami Iyengar, arrived there at 1 o’clock in the
in your presence?’ I told him, ‘Why should I do so? Where blazing sun. Bhagavan received him with his usual beam-
am I to go for the money? I am a penniless samiar with a ing face, his smile, and kindness. Sri Iyengar was asked by
piece of koupinam. You can take your peacock away. I did the devotees around to have his bath in the pond nearby.
not call it here.’ But the peacock continued to come as usual He left Sri Bhagavan’s presence to bathe there in front of
and none succeeded in stopping it from coming to me. the temple.
“Once when Palaniswami was laid up with fever, I “The spot was very lonely. Sri Iyengar was bathing at
used to visit him daily at Virupaksha Cave. This peacock the eastern ghat. All of a sudden Sri Bhagavan, who was
also would follow me during such occasions and after some
time, if I overstayed, he would remind and call me by
signs to return to the usual abode, Melasramam. One day
I just tried to play with the peacock by simply proceeding
some distance towards Melasramam from the Virupaksha
Cave and returning again slowly. Knowing this clearly, the
peacock also followed me hurriedly, came in front of me
and actually waylaid me, beckoning me to return without
proceeding further. He did not leave me till I reached the
Melasramam. He used to give some strokes on my head at
times, which would sound—Pottu-pottu—if I did not yield
to his wishes.”14
Wild Animals
Ramana had no fear of wild animals nor did they have any
fear of him. There is a graphic account of a happening in
the days when Ramana was staying in Pachaiamman Koil
in 1906. It is extracted in full as it shows how Ramana
treated wild animals and humans alike. “One day a devo-
seated inside the temple, left that place. Those around
thought he was walking out for some bodily need of his
own. When he came to the tank he saw a leopard which
had come to quench its thirst at the northern edge.
“Bhagavan quietly told the animal: ‘Go now, and
come later; he would be afraid,’ referring to the man bath-
ing nearby. At these words of Bhagavan the animal went
away.
“Sri Bhagavan went to the bather, who had by then
finished his bath, and said to him, ‘We should not come
here at this time of the day; wild animals come at these
hours to quench their thirst.’ He did not add that a wild
animal had actually come there, lest the man be fright-
ened.”15
110000\n--- 第114页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
Some devotees are familiar with the picture of Liberation of Cow Lakshmi
Ramana holding small cheetah cubs with his hands. It
happened in 1946. Some person who had reared two On Saturday, the fifth of Ani in the year
baby cheetahs brought them to Ramana’s presence. There Sarvadhari, the twelfth day of the waxing moon
they were fondled and given milk after which they moved under the asterism Visakha, the cow Lakshmi at-
freely with Ramana, slept with him soundly for some tained mukti.1
time. Some devotee took a photograph on the occasion —Bhagavan Ramana
after they had woken up.
Liberation means freedom from the death-birth cycle.
The wonder of it was that while they were there, squir-
Unless one’s mind, with its tendencies, subsides in the
rels came and ate nuts and sparrows came and ate broken
spiritual heart, the pre-existing tendencies will cause re-
rice as usual. In olden days when animals and birds of all
births, the rebirth being in accordance with one’s ethical
sorts moved about together without any enmity, people
balance sheet. A person who becomes Self-aware while
used to think that the place was a rishi’s asram. These are
in the body is called a jivan mukta, one who is liberated
stories related in the Puranas, says Suri Nagamma, “But
while alive. When the mind force merges in the heart at
here we see the same things before our very eyes.”16
the time of death, it is called videha mukti, liberation at
the point of death. It is generally believed that liberation
Snakes is attainable only by human beings and it is not open to
animals, who do not have a discriminative mind, by rea-
Dr. Srinivasa Rao, the asram doctor, asked Ramana son of which one can discover the truth. However, this
whether a snake had once crept over his body. Ramana general rule has very rare exceptions. One such exception
said, “Yes. Snakes raise their hoods and look into our eyes. recorded in the Hindu epics is that of Gajendra, king of
They seem to know when they need not be afraid and then
pass over us. It did not strike me either that I should do
anything to it.”17
When another devotee asked how he felt, Ramana
replied, “Cool and soft.”18
One devotee wished to know from Ramana whether
it was true that he was friendly with snakes while living
on the mountain. Ramana replied, “Yes, it is true. One
particular snake used to be friendly and would crawl over
my legs. At its touch my body used to feel as if it was tickled.
The snake used to come and go of its own accord.”19
While at Skandasramam a peacock would follow
Ramana everywhere. One day a huge black cobra ap-
peared at the asram and this peacock attacked it fierce-
ly. The two natural enemies were poised to fight to the
death. Then Ramana went near the cobra and said, “Why
do you come here? The peacock will kill you. Better go away
at once.”20 The cobra immediately lowered its hood and
slithered away.
On noticing a snake near Ramana’s hall, there was elephants, who got liberated by the grace of God Vishnu.
shouting outside. “What kind of snake is it. Beat it! Beat it! The divine power of Ramana’s grace, flowing through his
Ramana’s protest was not heard and the snake was killed. hands, has been responsible for liberating his mother
Then Bhagavan remarked, “If these people are beaten like Azhagammal, Cow Lakshmi, the deer Valli, and the dog
that, then they will know what it means.”21 Jack.
One night, a sleeping snake fell down from the roof of The story of Cow Lakshmi is particularly moving
the asram hall. Ramana ordered the men to take a lantern as we have the full details of it, stretching from the time
to light its path to the door and told them not to harm it. when she came to the asram as a calf in 1926 till her
Regarding the snakes which infested the place he said, mukti in June 1948.
“We have come to their abode as guests and so we have no Sometime in 1926, four years after Ramana settled
right to molest them. Let us leave them in peace.”22 down near the samadhi of his mother, one of his devotees
101\n--- 第115页 ---\nTimeless in Time
brought a cow and a calf as a gift to Ramana. The calf was
the now famous Lakshmi.
When she was young and frisky, occasionally she
would damage the vegetable garden. However, when she
was blamed for it Ramana would immediately defend her,
saying, “She is not to be blamed. She went where she found
good food. If you didn’t want her to go there you ought to
have fenced the garden properly to keep her out.”2
When the number of cows increased in the asram,
a special gosala (cowshed) was built and it was decided
that Lakshmi would be the first one to enter it. For this
purpose, she was bathed and decorated to enter her new
abode. But she slipped away and went to Ramana and sat
down there refusing to budge until he came and stepped
into her house first. She stepped in behind him.
Many of Lakshmi’s calves were born on Ramana’s
jayanti or birthday. Whenever she came to the hall
Ramana would pay attention to her, pat her, feed her with
plantains, or rice cakes. To every onlooker it was evident
that there was some special bond between them although
Lakshmi was a cow.
In her book, Pascaline Mallet records, “Maharshi’s fa-
vorite cow Lakshmi is a most beautiful creature with deli-
110022\n--- 第116页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
too overflowed as he looked at her with great love. How
could those standing nearby hold back their emotions?
He asked her tenderly, “Amma, do you want me to be near
you? I must go now as people are waiting for me in the hall.
But wherever I may be, I am always with you.”4 Then he
“placed his hand on her head as though giving diksha.
He put his hand over her heart also and then caressed
her, placing his cheek against her face. When he had con-
vinced himself that her heart was pure, free from all vasa-
nas entailing rebirth and centered solely on him, he took
leave of her and returned to the hall.… Her eyes were
calm and peaceful. She was conscious up to the end and
left the body at 11.30 a.m. quite peacefully.”5
A stone tomb was built over her grave, surmounted
by a likeness of her. On her tomb was engraved an epi-
taph by Ramana which makes it quite clear that she at-
tained liberation.
Later Ramana was asked by some devotees whether
he had used the term euphemistically. Ramana said that
he literally meant that Lakshmi had in fact been liber-
ated.
Though Ramana was compassion incarnate, he would
do his best not to show any outward signs of it, possibly
cate horns and almond shaped eyes. The love
she showed for Maharshi was very touching.
As we were sitting in the asram hall we heard
a noise outside and to our amazement up the
steps came Lakshmi, as if it were the most nat-
ural thing. She went straight up to Maharshi’s
couch and he at once greeted her most affec-
tionately and ordered that she should be given
some plantains to eat. Lakshmi, quite satis-
fied, turned away and went down. Needless to
say people seated on the floor gave way to her
amidst general laughter.… Maharshi sees the
same life in all although he recognizes differ-
ences in outer forms. His vision of equality is
based on the realization of the one behind the
many.”3
On June 17, 1948, Lakshmi fell ill. The
following morning, June 18, it looked as if
her end was near. At about 10 o’clock in the
morning Ramana went to her. He found her
breathing hard and she was lying prostrate.
Taking her head into his arms, stroking her
neck, Ramana fixed his gaze on her eyes. Her
breathing became steady immediately. Tears
began to trickle from her eyes. Ramana’s eyes
103\n--- 第117页 ---\nTimeless in Time
because it might lead to jealousies among the devotees or Surprisingly, though Brunton had come to India spe-
the feeling “I am a favorite of his.” However, there are two cifically for finding out the secrets of sacred India, his list
notable exceptions to this. The first relates to his mother of holy personages did not include Ramana Maharshi.
Azhagammal in whose case we have the only known Brunton firmly refused to meet him, not knowing
prayer by Ramana for her recovery from fever and also the divine scheme of things which started working.
from the delirium of illusion. The other instance is that of Venkataramani, a journalist friend of his, took him to
Cow Lakshmi where we find that he unhesitatingly and H.H. Chandrasekhara Saraswati Swami of Kanchi. The
at all times showed his love towards her. Even during the sage not merely suggested but insisted that Brunton
construction of the gosala he took special interest. “Again should go to Ramana. He said, “He is called Maharshi.
a few minutes after Lakshmi’s liberation, Ramana came I have not met him but I know him to be a high master.
to the gosala, squatted by her side, took her face in both Shall I provide you with full instructions, so that you may
his hands as though she were a little child, lifted it and discover him?” In his negative frame of mind Brunton
said, ‘Oh Lakshmi! Lakshmi!’ Then controlling his tears, demurred saying, “All arrangements are made for my de-
he said, ‘Because of her our family has grown to this ex- parture from the South tomorrow.” Then out of compas-
tent.’”6 sion the sage insisted on Brunton meeting the Maharshi
It is the total surrender of mother and Lakshmi before leaving South India.2
which must have evoked such obvious gestures of love The memorable first meeting was totally unexpected
from Ramana. for Brunton. The atmosphere was saturated with an un-
N
common, silent, and magnetic peace. Ramana’s eyes were
wide open and he seemed to be looking out into space.
Brunton too was drawn into this pervasive peace. In the
steady river of peace which was flowing, his thought-tor-
Some Western Devotees
tured mind rested. After the midday meal Brunton found
the opportunity for his first question and answer session
Paul Brunton
with Ramana.
O, sage of Aruna Hill, I bow at your feet with Q: I wish to have the experience of enlightenment.
thankfulness Can you assist me to experience enlightenment? Or is the
You have conferred spiritual riches on me, a search itself a mere delusion?
foreigner living in the West. A: You say “I.” “I” want to know. Tell me, who is that
Your grace you showered on me and made me a “I”? Know first that “I” and then you shall know the truth.
divine man. There is only one thing to be done. Look into your own self.
I am happy through your grace. No earthly Do this in the right way and you shall find the answer to
all your problems.
affliction can now disturb my peace.
Q: How long will it take to get some enlightenment
I have dedicated this book to you as my humble
with a master’s help?
tribute.
A: It all depends on the maturity of the seeker’s mind.
You belong to the ancient line of Maharshis of
The gunpowder catches fire in an instant, while much time
India.
is needed to set fire to the coal.3
If I can impart to others what you are pleased to
The Maharshi had given the core of his teachings but
teach me, my life’s purpose would be fulfilled.
I salute you over and over again.1 Brunton was not yet ready to comprehend it, let alone
accept it.
—Paul Brunton
Brunton kept extending his stay, first to a week and
Paul Brunton’s Search in Secret India, published in 1934 later to a fortnight, with growing impatience. His stay
has remained a bestseller since. From then onwards and was a “tantalizing mixture of sublime moods and disap-
even now, sixty-five years later, more and more seekers, pointing failures to effect any worthwhile personal con-
particularly in the West, have been drawn to Ramana tact with the Maharshi.” On the last day of his stay he
through this book. Its fascination has been and is such managed to interview Maharshi again, this time about
that there can be little doubt about its being inspired combining work and wisdom. Ramana told him, “The
by Ramana. Paul Brunton had a powerful pen, being a life of action need not be renounced. If you meditate in the
journalist from London. But it is Ramana’s grace which right manner, then the current of mind induced will con-
has made his book a mighty instrument for spreading tinue to flow even in the midst of your work. It is as though
Ramana’s message. there were two ways of expressing the same idea; the same
110044\n--- 第118页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
line which you take in meditation will be expressed in your behind all life. Th e inbuilt equipoise, resulting from well-
activities. As you go on you will fi nd that your attitude directed self-enquiry, would be the undercurrent in one’s
towards people, events, and objects will gradually change. busiest hours. Th e joy, which is one’s inherent nature,
Your actions will tend to follow your meditations of their would not be aff ected by the changing fl ow of circum-
own accord.”4 stances in the dynamics of life.
What Brunton had received was an epoch-making Unfortunately for Brunton, he did not realize that he
message of universal usefulness. For, Ramana’s teach- had arrived at the journey’s end. He was on the threshold
ings enable an inner renunciation, which ends confl ict of discovering the truth for himself but let go his chance.
between activity and meditation. One need not renounce Much suff ering and heart searching was still in store for
home or activities in order to discover the ultimate truth him. He had to wander round diff erent parts of India in
105\n--- 第119页 ---\nTimeless in Time
a vain, physically exhausting, and depressing hunt before Maharshi, his comparison of him with others, and his
returning to Ramana a second time. own preconceived ideas ended, thanks to Ramana’s over-
At that eleventh hour, after he had booked his pas- flowing grace.
sage to return to England, he responded to a compelling Brunton learnt “to submit to the enigma of his per-
“Inner Voice,” which forced him to return from Bombay sonality, and to accept him as he found him.” As a re-
to the Maharshi. sult spiritual inwardness started peaking. He began to
This time he was open to receive the truth from the understand that Ramana’s immense silence was even
Maharshi. He had come as a disciple would to the guru, more potent than his replies. “The realization forces it-
in a mood of humble surrender. He settled down near the self through my wonderment that all my questions are
asram, built a small cottage for himself and adjusted him- moves in an endless game, the play of thoughts which
self to the unhurried pace of life at the asram. Each day possess no limit to their extent; that somewhere within
would seemingly be no different from the earlier one. But me there is a well of certitude which can provide me with
the steady grace flowing from Ramana was effecting an all the waters of truth I require.”5 Then he was ready to
inner metamorphosis. To Brunton “day after day brought receive the Maharshi’s grace in full measure. One night
its fresh indication of the greatness of this man.” He could in the Maharshi’s hall it happened. “His sense of aware-
see for himself the daily occurrences in Ramana’s pres- ness was drawn out of the narrow confines of a separate
ence. His absolute equality and firm wisdom became personality. It had turned into something sublime and
evident to Brunton. At last his constant judgment of the all-embracing.”6
110066\n--- 第120页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
Later an old devotee tells him, “You have been in Whereas they themselves have given elsewhere a com-
a spiritual trance for nearly two hours. The Maharshi plete account of what happened in their meetings with
watched you closely all the time. I believe he guided Ramana. The first western lady devotee to come to Sri
you.”7 Ramanasramam was M.A. Pigot, an English lady, who
The onset of fever forced him to take a reluctant fare- had read A Search in Secret India and had come to India
well. This too was to be only in the physical sense. For to see the Maharshi.
Ramana was always with him, particularly during his Often she would be desperate because there would
meditations. always be a crowd and Ramana was never alone. His hall
was open to one and all at all times. But early one morn-
M.A. Pigot ing when she came into the hall she found him unattend-
ed, “emanating a wonderful stillness and peace.” With
After the publication of Paul Brunton’s Search in Secret his permission she put him some questions and got his
India, serious seekers in the west started coming to Sri clarifications.
Ramanasramam for guidance and clarification on the P: What are the hindrances to the realization of the
spiritual path. Though several hundreds of such seek- true Self?
ers had come, only some of them have left useful records R: Memory chiefly, habits of thoughts, accumulated
which throw light either on the personality of Ramana tendencies.
or on his teachings. The clarifications sought by a few P: How does one get rid of these hindrances?
of them and the replies given by Ramana have been re- R: Seek for the Self through meditation in this manner,
corded in Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi. However, we trace every thought back to its origin which is only the mind.
find that the recording in the Talks is often very brief. Never allow thought to run on. If you do, it will be unend-
107\n--- 第121页 ---\nTimeless in Time
ing. Take it back to its starting place—the mind—again objective meditation to non-existent division between
and again, and it and the mind will both die of inaction. subject and object. The object is only for the subject and
The mind exists only by reason of thought. Stop thought exists only when the attention of the subject or the indi-
and there is no mind. As each doubt and depression arises, vidual is there. If this is forgotten and the fact that the
ask yourself, “Who is it that doubts? What is it that is de- Self is one, whole, is forgotten, no meditation can result
pressed?” Go back constantly until there is nothing but the in sustained, inherent, peace of mind.
source of all left. And then, live always in the present and At the time of the farewell his talk was most touch-
only in it. There is no past or future, save in the mind.8 ing. He was so gentle and humane. He discussed the dif-
ficulties of everyday life and mundane
problems. Ramana’s parting message
was, “Do what is right at a given mo-
ment and leave it behind.”
Mercedes de Acosta
A Spanish American devotee, Mer-
cedes de Acosta, was at Sri Ramanas-
ramam in November 1938. At that
time she was a Hollywood socialite
and scriptwriter for films. Twenty-
four years later she wrote a book titled
Here Lies the Heart. Notwithstand-
ing this long time gap her account is
at once gripping and full of devotion
to Ramana to whom it has been dedi-
cated.
Once in Ramana’s presence she felt
that questions were needless. Doubts
were getting dissolved by themselves.
Out of her planned long list she need-
ed to ask a couple of questions only.
M.A.: Should I follow my inner-
self?
B.R : I do not know anything about
your inner self. You should follow the
Self. There is nothing or no one else to
follow.
M.A: What about religions, teach-
ers, and gurus?
P: What meditation will help me? B.R.: It is only by diving deep into the spiritual heart
R: You must learn to realize the subject and object as that one can find the Self.
one. In meditating on an object, whether concrete or ab- “Placing his hand on the right side of his chest
stract, you are destroying the sense of oneness and creating Ramana continued. ‘Here lies the heart, the dynamic
duality. Meditate on what you are in Reality. Try to realize spiritual heart. It is called Hrdaya and is clearly visible to
that the body is not you, the emotions are not you, the in- the inner eye of an adept in the spiritual path. Through
tellect is not you. When all these are still you will find.… meditation you can learn to find the Self in the cave of this
P: What? heart.’”10
R: You will discover, it is not for me to say what any At her first meeting as she was meditating, sitting at
individual experience will be. It will reveal itself. Hold on the feet of Ramana and facing him, he looked directly
to that.9 down at her, his eyes looking into hers. She says, “It
It will be seen that Ramana is emphasizing the neces- would be impossible to describe this moment. I can only
sity for holistic meditation. Ramana traces the malaise of say that at this second I felt my inner being raised to a
110088\n--- 第122页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
new level. Then Bhagavan smiled at me. It seemed to me need for questions. Do not imagine that this means being
that I had never before known what a smile was.”11 inactive. Silence is the only real activity.”14
“The transformation which took place in her by
merely being in his presence was sufficient nourishment Uma Devi
for a lifetime. How could it have been otherwise?”12
After returning to America she sent a few questions Uma Devi, a Polish lady converted to Hinduism, was
to Ramana for clarifications. These questions are about one of the staunch devotees of Ramana. She has written
reincarnation, the past, and the future. a book The Teaching of Ramana Maharshi which has at-
Q: Is reincarnation a fact? tracted many seekers from Poland to Ramana. She has
A: You are incarnated now, aren’t you? Then you will also translated Bhagavad Gita into Polish.
be so again. Uma Devi was a frequent visitor to Sri Ramanasra-
Q: What is death? What is birth? mam. During one of her visits in February 1938, she put
A: Only the body has death and birth. some questions to Ramana, whose replies are a lucid ex-
Q: How much time may elapse between death and position of the all-pervasiveness of Consciousness. She
rebirth?
A: Perhaps one is reborn within
a year, three years, or thousands of
years. Who can say? Anyway what
is Time? Time does not exist.
Q: Why have we no memory
of past lives?
A: Why do you want to re-
member other lives that are also
illusions? If you abide within the
Self, there is no past or future and
not even a present since the Self is
out of time. It is timeless.
Q: Then when we leave this
body, will the ego immediately
grasp another body?
A: Oh, yes it must. It cannot
exist without a body.
Q: What sort of body will it
grasp?
A: Either a physical body or a
subtle-mental body. Group photo with Ramana; Uma Devi is seated in the second row, first
Q: Do you call this present physical body the gross from the right
body?
wished to have a continuous vision of Siva, who meant
A: Only to distinguish it, to set it apart in conversa-
everything to her. Ramana clarified to her the importance
tion.
of direct perception of the Self through self-enquiry. “A
Q: What causes us to be reborn? vision depends on the subject. It would appear and disap-
A: Desires. Unfulfilled desires bring you back. And in pear. It is not inherent, not first hand.” Bhagavan contin-
each case—in each body as your desires are fulfilled, you ued, “Therefore enquire ‘Who am I?’ Sink deep within and
create new ones.13 abide as the Self.…”
Having answered all the questions Ramana gave her Q: Yes, But how shall I effect it as quickly as pos-
a most important piece of advice which is universally ap- sible?
plicable. “These questions are good, but tell de Acosta she A: This is the obstacle for realization. There is no
must not become too intellectual about these things. It is question of time. Surrender to Him and abide by His will
better just to meditate and have no thought. Let the mind whether He appears or vanishes, await His pleasure. If
rest quietly in the Self, in the cave of the spiritual heart. you ask Him to do as you please it is not surrender but a
Soon this will become natural and then there will be no command to Him. You cannot have Him obey you and yet
109\n--- 第123页 ---\nTimeless in Time
think that you have surrendered. He knows what is best When one thinks of Arthur Osborne, a tall, saintly fig-
and when and how to do it. Leave everything entirely to ure comes to one’s mind. From his youth he was attracted
Him. His is the burden, no longer do you have any cares. to the inner way of life thanks to the influence of René
All your cares are His. Such is surrender.… Guénon, the French philosopher. Guénon had expound-
Or enquire to whom these questions arise. Dive deep in ed the view “that all beings manifest the one Self or pure
the Heart and remain as the Self. One of these two ways is Being and that I, in my essence, am identical with the
open to the aspirant now. Think of the man who sees only Self.”
the cloth and not the cotton of which it is made, or the man The first meeting was only towards the end of 1945.
who sees the pictures moving on the screen in a cinema Osborne had gone to Tiruvannamalai, more because his
show and not the screen itself as the background; or again family was staying near Ramanasramam rather than to
the man who sees the letters which he reads but not the meet the Maharshi. This is surprising because Osborne
paper on which they are written. The objects are the con- was to be a vital instrument of Ramana. A large number
sciousness and forms. The ordinary person sees the objects of Western seekers were to be drawn to the direct path
in the universe but not the consciousness in these forms.15 of Ramana through Osborne’s books and his editorials
in the quarterly magazine The Mountain Path. This only
Arthur Osborne indicates that the divine has its own timings.
Osborne was not much impressed by Ramana when
Such have I known, they met first. He says, “During the weeks that followed
Him of the Lustrous eyes, he was constantly gracious to me and the strain of nerves
Him whose sole look and mind gradually released, but there was no dynamic
Pierced to the Heart, contact.”17 All this changed suddenly when on a festival
Of wisdom deeper than in the holy book, day, in the evening the “revelation occurred.” Osborne
Of truth alone.16 was sitting facing Ramana whose eyes pierced him in-
—Arthur Osborne tensely. “It was as though he said, ‘You have been told,
why have you not realized?’ And
then quietness, a depth of peace,
and an indescribable lightness and
happiness.”18 Osborne was con-
vinced that Ramana had accepted
him as his disciple and taken over
the responsibility of guiding him
as a guru on the universally accept-
able path of self-enquiry. Osborne
quickly learnt that Ramana’s path,
far from being impractical, was
entirely oriented towards practice
and experience. Osborne began to
feel the vital presence of Ramana
in the heart and the support of
his “outpouring grace” in his sad-
hana. He felt that Ramana was
the inner guru, available always to
seekers who relied on him. This
enabled him to face the long ill-
ness of Ramana’s body for fourteen
months, and his mahanirvana in
1950, with fortitude and courage.
He had firm faith in Ramana’s
statement “Where can I go? I am
here.”
N
Ramana and Adam Osborne
110\n--- 第124页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
The Thirties and Forties Is not the tapasya of the ancient mahatmas still valid?
Will it not benefit the present generation?
The publication of Self Realization in 1931 by B.V. A: Yes, of course it will. But it should be remembered
Narasimha Swami, the first biography of Ramana, fol- that no single person is a claimant of it. It is only that grace
lowed by Paul Brunton’s Search in Secret India soon which has aroused awakening among the people.3
thereafter, helped in making Ramana’s life and teachings However, Rajendra Prasad remained silent through-
well known in India and abroad. There was therefore a out. At the time of their departure, he asked; “Mahatma
regular stream of seekers, devotees, and visitors. In the Gandhi has sent me to the Maharshi. Is there any message
scheme of providence practically the entire recorded that I can take to him?” to which the Maharshi replied,
talks and conversations with
them has been contempora-
neously preserved, through
Talks, Conscious Immortality,
Guru Ramana, Day by Day with
Bhagavan, Living by the Words
of Ramana and More Talks.
Between them they cover more
than a thousand pages, a stand-
ing testimony of Ramana’s grace
and compassion for all who had
sought his guidance for the in-
ner journey.1 This makes the
position of Ramana as a univer-
sal guru very special. “Maharshi
is unique in the history of world
seers.” “To have lived for full fif-
ty-four years after Realization,
to have influenced so many
from his seat in one place, to
have been accessible to all at all
hours, to have stemmed the tide
of skepticism as he did, is some-
thing truly unprecedented.”2
In 1938 Rajendra Prasad
spent three days at the asram
as a messenger of Mahatma
Gandhi. He was accompanied
by Jamnalal Bajaj. During this
visit Bajaj put some interesting
questions.
Q: If Swaraj is gained by
intense struggle is not a person justified in being over- “What message is needed when heart speaks to heart? It is
whelmed with joy? the same sakti which is working there also.”4
A: In this sacrifice one should have surrendered him- The great event of the post-war years was the cel-
self to the higher power, which alone has brought about the ebration of the Golden Jubilee of Ramana’s advent at
result. He should not forget it. Then where is the cause for Arunachala, on September 1, 1946.
elation? One would have done his duty without caring for The first intimation of the special event was hinted
the result. This is nishkama karma. to Subbaramayya by Ramana when he visited the asram
Q: Is there no suitable power on earth which would in June 1946. While going up the hill Ramana informed
bestow grace on the devotees, so that they may work ef- him, “Venkatachalam Chetty had a brain wave. The
ficiently and gain Swaraj? idea of such a celebration first occurred to him and since
After a pause J.B. continued: he made the proposal, it seems to have caught everyone’s
111\n--- 第125页 ---\nTimeless in Time
fancy.”5 All were geared to its befitting celebration there- participated fully in all the ceremonies connected with it.
after. A few days prior to the event the asram was crowd- It is the only temple for an enlightened woman anywhere
ed with devotees from different parts of the country. in the world. That it should be in honor of Ramana’s
They had come by buses and lorries braving the railway mother is in the fitness of things, for it was he who had
strike from August 23, 1946. Compositions in praise of declared in 1917 that in enlightenment, and the efforts to
Ramana were read both in the mornings and evenings discover it, men and women are equal.7
N
from August 30, for many were keen on expressing their
gratitude and reverence. Suri Nagamma echoes their
feelings when she says, “When he who is omnipresent,
who is omniscient, and incomprehensible comes in hu- Vicarious Penance
man form what can you give him”? How can we worship
him?”6 A special, spacious thatched shed was erected to He who was crucified and rose again
the north of and adjacent to the Old Hall, which came to Has taught the noble dharma
be known as the Jubilee Hall. The floor was cemented and That for the sins of others too
the hall was tastefully decorated. We should do penance
The event of events was the consecration of the And redeem them.
Matrubhuteswara temple on March 17, 1949. Ramana May this dharma of compassion
111122\n--- 第126页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
Taught by the true brahmin, Venkata, Early in February 1949, the asram doctor, Dr. Shankar
Flourish ever, this dharma of the cross Rao, assisted by Dr. Srinivasa Rao, removed a very small
The dharma of vicarious penance.1 growth on the left elbow of Ramana. They duly bandaged
—Muruganar it and the bandage was removed on February 22, since
it was presumed to have healed.2 This comparatively in-
Jesus Christ was crucified on the cross. Sri Ramakrishna
nocuous, minor operation, was to be the beginning of the
suffered from throat cancer. Sri Ramana’s body suffered
end of Ramana’s sacred body.
from sarcoma for many long months from early February
The lump which had been removed early in February
1949 to April 14, 1950. Four operations had to be per-
1949, and which was thought to have healed satisfacto-
formed on his body and the pain was excruciating. The rily, subsequently started to grow again. So the services
world is unable to understand the suffering of the bodies of an eminent surgeon from Madras, Dr. Raghavachari,
of the saviors of humanity like them. “Why should the were availed of. On March 27, he came from Madras
pure, spotless ones suffer?” is the question which arises with surgical instruments and assistants to remove the
in the minds of many. growth.3
The reason for this is given in the above verses of We may regard this as the second operation. Earlier, a
Muruganar. The crucifixion of the bodies of world teach- report had come from the analysts about the small growth
ers is a logical corollary of their universal love and com- removed in February 1949 and the growth had been diag-
passion. They suffered for the sins of others. Theirs is vi- nosed as malignant sarcoma.4 Dr. Raghavachari and his
carious penance. panel of doctors came to the asram again on May 1, and
113\n--- 第127页 ---\nTimeless in Time
after thorough examination they came to the conclusion the long ailment of Ramana’s body and the manner in
that the only solution lay in the amputation of Ramana’s which he faced it. The dreaded disease racking his body
left arm. Ramana told him, “As I let you look after your was taken by him in the stride. He remained calm, peace-
body, you will please let me look after mine.” Ramana had ful, and steadfastly rooted in the Self.
expressively negated the only hope of saving his body. N
The devotees felt that he had literally pronounced the
death sentence on his body. Ramana was totally uncon-
cerned and walked back to the Old Hall.5 Devotees Panic—Ramana’s Response
Even though Ramana had rejected the only possible
cure Dr.Raghavachari kept trying his best to prevent the
For devotees who were deeply attached to the physical
growth of sarcoma. On August 8, the third operation
form of Ramana, this long suffering was unbearable. All
started.6
said and done they looked upon his body not the way he
The fourth and final operation took place on
would look upon it, but the way they would look upon
December 19. The fourth operation too was not success-
their own body. One’s identification with the perishable
body would be transposed on to
the sadguru’s body as well. The
very purpose of the guru is to re-
move the illusion caused by this
identification and though he is
constantly drawing one’s atten-
tion to one’s nature, yet the iden-
tification, being deep-rooted, is
difficult to erase.
Small wonder that the devo-
tees panicked after the fourth op-
eration. Each came forward with
his pet theory as to what would
be the best course of treatment.
Earlier some of the poets,
among them Muruganar and
Subbaramayya, tried to per-
suade Ramana to cure himself.
Muruganar handed Ramana a
poem praying that he should live
up to a hundred years in perfect
health. A devotee read it aloud.
Hearing it Ramana said, “There
is a story of a Vaishnava saint, in
whose centenary celebrations his
disciples prayed that he should
live for nearly a hundred years.
You want me to live up to hun-
dred years so that you may at the
end of it pray for another hundred
years!”1
ful because the lump appeared again higher up. “The sur-
Subbaramayya indirectly hinted that Bhagavan
geon came both on February 15, and March 17, and gave
should cure himself by exercising his will power. He read
his report which was not released. Presumably it was to
out a passage in a journal, which stated that if will-power
indicate that no further operation was possible.”7
is strong it would be effective in curing any disease. After
We have to be thankful to S.S. Cohen for maintaining
hearing this Ramana told TPR, “Subbaramayya wants me
a diary for the entire period from June 16, 1948 to April
to cure myself with will-power. He indicated as much by
16, 1950. Consequently we have an authentic record of
showing me an article today. But the jnani has no will of
111144\n--- 第128页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
his own. Nor is he identified with the body and the ills to have taken a big meal.” Again he also remarked, “Why all
which it is heir.”2 this kanji? Give me buttermilk.”8
Ramana’s reaction against this suggestion was con- In spite of the contra-indications of its obvious fail-
tinued even the next day, “Yesterday Prof. Subbaramayya ure, his treatment was continued till April 10. As usual
spoke to me of curing disease by will-power, implying that Ramana’s attitude of cooperation with what was decid-
I should cure my arm by my own will. Did I ask the tumor ed for him, out of the love for devotees, made him go
to come so that I may tell it to go? It came of its own accord. through the treatment without any kind of protest.
What then has my will got to do with it?”3 Ramana’s own attitude towards the varied treatments
Another lady devotee said to him with tears, “Bhaga- to his body is well summarized by Viswanatha Swami.
van, you, who are curing others must cure yourself and “Whenever a course of treatment was decided upon by
must spare your life for us, your devotees.” Ramana re- the asram, he abided by it, rather to please the devotees
plied with great tenderness, “Why are you so attached to than to get cured. He has often said, “It is for us to witness
this body? Let it go.”4 all that happens,” and his behavior was a perfect illustra-
These remarks of Ramana clearly indicate that so far tion of this.”9
as he was concerned he was aware that the
disease had come to claim his body. It should
be allowed to run its course. This reminds one
of the advice Ramana had given to Sunderesa
Iyer in 1930. Sunderasan was attempting to
learn to make leaf plates. Ramana, who was
also making them, told him, “Look at these
leaf plates. With considerable trouble you pre-
pare these leaf plates. And then we use it once
to eat our food; thereafter it is thrown away.
Such is the case with this body of ours. We
must attend to it with care till its purpose is
served.”5
After the fourth operation, devotees more
or less took the course of treatment into their
own hands by their collective strength. Their
fears gave them the required resolve. “The
pent-up feelings of the devotees has run so
high yesterday, it found expression in the cry
‘Homeopathy, Homeopathy’ from many of
them.”6 At their insistent demand, a veteran
homeopath T.S. Iyer was requested to take up
the case. He started his course of treatment
on December 24th. When his treatment
also failed some devotees questioned him.
Ramana intervened and said, “Why do you
cross-examine him like Alladi (a famous law-
yer of the times). Ask me. I will tell you. I am
feeling better after he began the treatment.”7
Lastly, devotees from Bengal took a hand
and suggested that the case should be handed over to In December 1949, when the devotees were at a loss
Khaviraj from Calcutta who was in their opinion the as to what treatment should be tried next, one of them ap-
best Ayurvedic doctor. He was rushed in and started his proached to ask Ramana. He replied with a smile, “Have I
treatment on March 29, 1950. His strong application and ever asked for any treatment? It is you who want this and
medicines were totally unsuited to Ramana in that state that for me. So it is you who must decide. If I were asked,
of health. Ramana told his attendants, “I do not want to I would always say, as I said from the beginning, that no
eat or drink. If I take more than two ounces, I feel as if I treatment is necessary. Let things take their course.”10
115\n--- 第129页 ---\nTimeless in Time
N
sembles the case of two lovers in the story who were tortured
together, but did not feel the pain because their minds were
in ecstasy gazing at each other’s face.”1
Did Ramana Suffer?
Ramana’s constant mood of bliss, his concern for the
His Attitude to Darsan devotees, his gracious look and smile might have misled
one about the response of his body to the extreme physi-
In June 1938, Cohen questioned Ramana on the issue cal pain caused by the deadly disease sarcoma. Once he
whether a jnani has pain. In the context of Ramana’s sar- remarked to a devotee R. Narayana Iyer, “Appa! Who
coma, this question and Ramana’s answer are relevant. could conceive that such a disease as this could be in this
Cohen: Does a jnani who is in sahaja samadhi feel world? When a hiccough comes the whole body splits like
any physical pain, say a sting or cut? flashes of lightning in a cloud!”2
Ramana: All pains, even physical, are in the mind. Another devotee notes Ramana’s remarks to his at-
Everybody feels the pain of a cut or a sting, but a jnani tendants, “There is not a spot which has not been painful to
whose mind is sunk in bliss feels it as in a dream. His re- touch.”3 This too was said not in an attitude of complaint
111166\n--- 第130页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
about the pain but as a hint to his attendants to take Mahanirvana
greater care when they lifted or touched in the painful
spot. According to the surgeons who operated on him, Darsan had been limited to a few hours in the morn-
the way he bore the post-operational pain was exemplary. ing and a few hours in the evening after January 1950.
In this context one might remember that Ramana under- Ramana was too weak to go to the hall. There was a nar-
went four operations for his sarcoma. row little verandah outside the room where his mahanir-
The suffering must have been quite intense. When vana was to take place, where his couch was put right
one of his attendants asked whether there was a need for up to a few days before April 14, 1950. Devotees would
a commode, Ramana told him, “I do not want to eat or file past. They again did so in the evening. Many of them
drink, so that I may not need the use of the commode. If I had received in the “last few days a direct luminous pen-
take only a little nourishment, it will dry up inside and I etrating look of recognition which they felt was a parting
will not need to rise every now and then. Besides, if I take infusion of grace.”1
more than two ounces, I feel as if I have taken a big meal.” Swami Satyananda, the attendant who was looking
In the context of this great pain the compassion and after Ramana’s body at that time, has given an account of
love of Ramana for the devotees assumes great signifi- what happened. He reports, “On the evening of 14th April
cance. 1950, we were massaging Sri Ramana’s body. At about
The devotees were extremely anxious about Ramana’s 5 o’clock, he asked us to help him to sit up. Precisely at
condition. But he, compassion personified, did not want that moment devotees started chanting ‘Arunachala Siva,’
to break even his common dining with the devotees in ‘Arunachala Siva.’ When Sri Bhagavan heard this his face
the dining hall! This meant he had to climb some steep lit up with radiant joy. Tears began to flow from his eyes
steps for entry. But he took care to instruct his attendant and continued to flow for a long time. I was wiping them
Satyananda, not to disturb the dinner schedule.
Having regard to the condition of his body, the man-
agement decided to limit the hours of darsan by closing
the doors of his hall for a couple of hours in the afternoon,
but Ramana had it opened immediately arguing, “Many
people come from great distances for the darsan and can-
not wait till evening; they must not be disappointed.… If
you pin the devotees to only these hours, the time may not
suit some of them who will be greatly inconvenienced.”4 The
devotees had to be requested not to disturb him during
these hours. But quite often new visitors who were not
aware of this request would be barging in.
A day after his third operation, against the doctors
advice for rest, Maharshi left the dispensary where the
operation had taken place and went to the hall for dar-
san. As always what he cared for was not to inconve-
nience the devotees. Both in the morning and evening,
though for an hour at each time, there was darsan till his
mahanirvana.
In this context one could refer to two verses from
Yoga Vasishtam, which he had translated, reading, “A
jnani who has found himself as formless pure aware-
ness is unaffected though his body be cleft with a sword.
Sugar-candy does not lose its sweetness though broken
or crushed.”5
Two days before mahanirvana, in the morning, a
relative of his came to have his darsan. Ramana remem-
bered that it was the day of the relative’s father’s death
anniversary and asked him, “Have you performed shrad-
dha ceremony today? Did so and so (naming the person)
attend it?”6 N
117\n--- 第131页 ---\nTimeless in Time
from time to time. I was also giving him spoonfuls of wa- Brassen witnessed the event and rushed to check the ex-
ter boiled with ginger. The doctor wanted to administer act time.
artificial respiration but Sri Bhagavan waved it away.… N
Sri Bhagavan’s breathing became gradually slower and
slower and at 8.47 p.m, it subsided quietly.”2
We also have the first-hand account of what hap- Samadhi Function and Significance of
pened precisely at this moment in the heavens. “Suddenly,
the Samadhi
a bright and luminous body arose from the southern ho-
rizon, slowly went up and descended in the north some-
After mahanirvana, the body of Ramana was duly gar-
where on the Arunachala hill. It was not a meteor as it
landed and put up on a couch in the hall in order to en-
was bigger than what Venus looks to our vision and its
able the large crowd to pay their last homage. The news
movement was slow. It was so lustrous that when it was
had spread like wildfire and thousands of persons from
at the zenith the light shed by its trail stretched as far as
the horizon like an arc in the sky.”3 the town and nearby villages started gathering to pay the
last homage. “A proper queue was formed seven to ten
This luminous body in the sky was witnessed at
broad and they filed past the dear body at a quick march
Chennai, Bombay, and all over India. Witnessing it at
pace till about midnight.”
Chennai, immediately K.K. Nambiar, who guessed the
A large congregation of devotees
kept vigil the whole night singing
and chanting the Vedas and Ramana’s
compositions.
“Next morning the body was
shifted to the south verandah for wor-
ship. The samadhi pit was dug 10 ½ x
10 ½ feet and seven feet deep. In its
center the masons isolated a small
area of 4 ½ x 4 ½ feet and surrounded
it by a wall of granite stones, lime, and
cement. The remaining portion they
filled with many cartloads of sand said
to have been brought from the sacred
Ganges and Narmada valleys.
“At 6.30 p.m., the body, which by
then had received the homage of not
less than about 40,000 persons, was
carried in a decorated palanquin re-
served for the Deity of the temple to
the samadhi. Here it was placed in the
same yogasana into a bag made of the
finest khaddar, which was then filled
with pure camphor and lowered into
the small area reserved for it. Then the
pit was filled to the brim with cam-
phor, salt, and sacred ashes to pro-
tect the body from worms and rapid disintegration, and
reason, hastened to Tiruvannamalai. Similarly, one
closed with masonry work.”l
Kaikobod, a Parsee devotee, who happened to be on the
N
terrace of his house, immediately hired a taxi and came
over. Ms. H.P. Petit who was sitting on the balcony of her
house in Bombay about 1000 miles away also saw this
phenomenon at this fateful moment. At Tiruvannamalai
itself, the famous French photographer Monsieur Cartier
Above and opposite: the final photographs taken of the Maharshi
111188\n--- 第132页 ---\nSri Ramanasramam Years
119\n--- 第133页 ---\nTimeless in Time
120\n--- 第134页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Section VI: Timeless in Time
The Post-Nirvana Scene The Continuing Story
Absence There was no emptiness, no cause for tears,
When I went back to Arunachala
Lonely they go, with heavy heart,
And trod the ways that for these many years
The simple folk whose sunlight was His smile,
Shone with God’s Grace in the form of Ramana.
Who loved His laughter and deep silences
And then, I sat in silence, as of old,
And gracious ways,
Before Him. Like a sudden wave
Hungry they go, who fed on Grace,
His mighty Peace surged through me to enfold
As Ramana,
In Knowledge-Being beyond birth and grave.
Whose only doctrine was their love of Him.
Ineffable, beyond the range of thought,
Life holds henceforth an endless emptiness,
The timeless Peace that from His Presence flows:
Though filled with Grace.
Even vaster now the wealth of Grace He brought
Silent they sit before His tomb, Through human form and formless now bestows.1
Or pace around.
—Arthur Osborne
Bereaved they go in a sad life;
And well l know
The heart-ache for the living graciousness
The outer world will never hold again
For eyes of ours.1
—Arthur Osborne
This poem by Arthur Osborne reflects the state of mind of
the devotees immediately after the ceremonies connected
with the samadhi shrine of Ramana were over. They just
could not accept the reality as it was. They loved him too
dearly and could not envisage a situation in which his
bodily presence would be absent. So when the mahanir-
vana happened each and every one of them was plunged
in deep gloom and despair. Life had lost its meaning. He
was not there, nothing else mattered.
Writing in his diary, on April 12, 1950, Cohen says,
“It looks as if we are on the eve of the Doomsday, the
eve of a day on which we are destined to be deprived of
everything we hold worth living for .… Our refuge, our
hopes, our greatest treasure, the precious life of the mas-
ter.”2
Osborne reports, “The crowds dispersed and the as-
ram seemed an abandoned place, like a grate with the fire
gone out. And yet there was not the wild grief and despair
that so often followed the departure of a Spiritual Master
from earth. The normality that had been so pronounced
still continued. It began to be apparent with what care
and compassion Sri Bhagavan had prepared his devotees
for this. Nevertheless, during those first days and weeks
of bereavement few cared to remain at Tiruvannamalai,
and some who would have cared to could not.”3
N
The inside of the Old Hall, where Ramana spent most of his life
after moving down from Arunachala
121\n--- 第135页 ---\nTimeless in Time
The samadhi of Bhagavan Sri Ramana
those who heard about Ramana from the disciples. In this
sense all those thousands of seekers who had either been
in Ramana’s presence, read his works, or heard about his
reminiscences continued to be the channels of his grace
and focal points of imparting the same to others.
Paul Brunton, writing in 1970, forty years after his
sessions with Ramana at Sri Ramanasramam, emphati-
cally notes the continued impact of Maharshi’s presence:
“Forty years have passed since I walked into his abode
and saw the Maharshi .… I can truthfully declare that his
face, expression, figure, and surroundings are as vivid
now as they were then. What is even more important to
me is that during my daily periods of meditation, the feel-
ing of his radiant presence is as actual and as immediate
today as it was on that first day.”2 Thinking of the reason
for this he concludes that this was because Ramana was a
pure channel of a “Higher Power.”
Like Osborne, many old devotees found for them-
Today daily pujas take place at Ramana’ shrine selves the truth of Ramana’s affirmation, “Where am I to
The impact of Ramana on those who had seen him go? I am here.” Denied the outer sight and its extraordi-
when he was in the body and even those who had merely nary beauty, they learnt to discover his inner presence
heard about him ever remains with them throughout more keenly than before. This faith was confirmed for
their lifetime. That silence, that piercing look, that long them by continual experience. Duncan Greenlees refers
glance sideways would establish a continuing relationship to the gopi-devotees of Vrindavan to whose adoring eyes
which lasted even after the mahanirvana. They would do Krishna had to deny his form, only to awaken in them
the work of the guru in turning the person inward, heart- more keenly the awareness of his dancing presence in
ward. This is so be it a student on a casual visit to the their hearts. Greenlees says that Ramana too had veiled
asram or a seeker searching the secrets of India or even the form they loved so well, “that its beauty might no
112222\n--- 第136页 ---\nTimeless in Time
longer draw our gaze away from the everlasting presence concepts, by thoughts. It will be pure like ether, reflective
enthroned in our heart.”3 of the bliss of the Self.
Similarly Ramana revealed his continued presence to Ramana’s path is straight, one travels from illusion to
Cohen who writes, “When Bhagavan used to say that the knowledge by a proper understanding of the mind. This
guru is not the body many failed to grasp its meaning; implies understanding its nature and its source. Source!
but as time passed and as he continued to show them his One has to proceed step by step. Was there a mind in
grace and support in their meditation the significance of
these words gradually became clear.”4
What of those who did not have this blessing of a
physical contact with Ramana in some way during the
time when he was in the body? The answer to this ques-
tion is that it has made no difference to the power of his
presence. Many have recorded the experiences they have
had at his samadhi at Sri Ramanasramam, by reading his
books, or by merely looking at a photograph of his.
N
Teachings
The raindrops showered down by the clouds, risen
from the sea, cannot rest until they reach, despite
all hindrance, once again their ocean-home. A
bird may hover here and there and cannot in mid-
heaven stay. It must come back the way it went to
find at last on earth alone its resting-place. Even
so the individual must turn to you, O Aruna Hill,
and merge again in you alone, Ocean of bliss.1
—Bhagavan Ramana
Ever as “I” in the heart you dance,
Hence you are called the Heart.2
The Vedapatasala at Ramanasramam, where the young brahmin boys are
—Bhagavan Ramana
taught to chant the Vedas
To his first disciple Gambhiram Seshier,
Ramana termed his teaching as “Intui-
tive Knowledge of the Heart”—dahara
vidya.3 Experientially it is the feeling of
bliss brimming over in the heart. It takes
the form of a ceaseless throb, “I,” “I,” which
is expressive of the fullness of conscious-
ness. It is natural and inherent and there-
fore accessible to all. It is ever there. Only,
awareness of it is obstructed by the illusory
superimposition of a separate mind apart
from this heart. Once the illusion, the false
knowledge, is dispelled by the searchlight
of truth, and steadily at that, one is back
in one’s true home, one’s natural state, in
the heart. All search on the spiritual path
must end in this discovery, in this revela-
tion. When this happens the mind is rid of
its limitation caused by identification, by
123\n--- 第137页 ---\nTimeless in Time
sleep? No. Is there a mind on waking? Yes. It must have If “I” is only a phenomenon of the waking state, can
a source, must it not? Otherwise where can it subside it be the “I”-consciousness? Is it self-conscious? Or is
and wherefrom can it rise again? Surely it must be from its consciousness, its strength, its energy derived from
within oneself. For there is no break in the identity, in its source into which it had subsided unconsciously in
the continuity between the two states. The source must, sleep?
This would give rise to an
attitude of doubt about its na-
ture. What then is the mind? If
one observes it would be seen
that the mind is a movement of
thoughts, coming and going, but
built around a core, center, the
“I” thought. Though thoughts
are beguiling in their numbers
and variety, they are essentially
disparate. When the individu-
al’s attention is on them, they
surface on the mental horizon
and disappear when there is a
shift in that attention to anoth-
er thought. Therefore, Ramana
states that it would be logical to
regard the mind as only the “I”
thought, the thinker, the indi-
vidual. Further enquiry into
the nature of this center would
be possible only to the extent
one can isolate it or separate it
from its association with innu-
merable thoughts. Otherwise
attention cannot be focused on
it. For this, Ramana suggests a
weapon in the form of a ques-
tion, “Who am ‘I’?” This has
the instant effect of refocusing
attention on the center, away
from other thoughts. The main
advantage would be to disen-
tangle oneself from a jungle of
thoughts.
The thinker is so deeply
mixed up with his thoughts,
so nostalgic about some, so
anticipatory about others, that
their grip is quite powerful.
They would not let go their
inferentially, be said to be an energizing source, for one suzerainty, let go their power to be obsessive, to be re-
wakes up refreshed, and recalls the repose enjoyed dur- silient. Shifting attention from them, from their cease-
ing sleep. One would not like to miss sleep even for a less chattering, is rendered all the more difficult due to
single day. The second point therefore is that the source addiction to thoughts. We cling to thoughts thanks to
must be fullness of consciousness, responsible for this the idea that when one is not having thoughts, heaven
daily rejuvenation. knows that we have cartloads of them, we would be life-
112244\n--- 第138页 ---\nTimeless in Time
less. The truth is that the mind which is spacious alone But self-enquiry, taught by Ramana, is a sure means,
can be supple, sharp, and fully responsive. This situation an infallible way to get to the source. Thoughts will be-
has been brought about by our being choosy regarding come weakened, enervated, and reduced in number by
thoughts, being selective, wishing to retain some and dis- the simple act of ignoring them. They die from inatten-
tion. Ramana has given the analogy of capturing a fort by
card others, instead of throwing them all, lock, stock, and
starving its inmates, by a siege which cuts off food and
barrel, into the dustbin where they belong. Hence, in his
water supply to the soldiers within it.5
instructions given in 1900, Ramana says, “Immediately, a
Self-enquiry would have the effect of silencing the
thought arises, it must be annihilated at its source. If enter-
mind by warding off one’s association with thoughts. The
tained for a little while, it would hurl one down headlong
intermingling would end. The mind’s energies can and
like a treacherous friend.”4
need to be focused on the mind itself. It must be kept ac-
This requires “patience and more patience” for the en-
tive in pursuit of itself, in paying attention to its source.
emy is long entrenched. The habitual way is to be focused
This may be termed as Self-attention. Self-enquiry has
on the mind’s center, on the “I” thought. As Ramana once acted as the initial thrust, enabling one to cut oneself
remarked, the malaise arises because “one has never faced off from the mental movement. Self-attention completes
the ‘I.’” The mind’s searchlight has not been on itself but the job for one is now on the threshold of Self-knowl-
on the movement of thoughts, away from itself. edge. For this, the second weapon in Ramana’s armory,
125\n--- 第139页 ---\nTimeless in Time
“Whence am ‘I’?” has to be pressed into service. It is the To enquire, silently and deeply, as to the source
other blade in a pair of scissors. Having actively warded Of the mind, the “I,”
off thoughts one has to be passively alert and let the pow- Alone is self-enquiry.
er within take over. Ramana assures that this will happen Ideas like “I am that,” or “I am not this” are but
naturally. He has explained, “The Self is like a powerful aids.9
magnet hidden within us. It draws us gradually to itself.… The ego falls, crestfallen, when one enquires
The truth is that we are like iron filings. The process of find- “Who am I?” and enters the Heart.
ing the Self is a kind of divine magnetism.”6 Cleansed of the Then another “I”-“I,” throbs unceasingly, by itself,
rusting caused by thoughts the mind is drawn irresistibly It is not the ego but the Self itself, the whole.10
within to its source, to the divine current, to the heart.
The importance of diving within, seeking the source
In one of his compositions Ramana has explained his
of the mind, of the “I,” is stressed by Ramana in his
method with utmost clarity: “When there is no ‘I’ thought
Upadesa Saram: “Sinking the mind in the Heart, its source,
there can be no other thought. When other thoughts arise, is karma, bhakti, yoga, and knowledge.”11
ask, ‘To whom? To me? Where from does this “I” arise?’
In self-enquiry also Ramana stresses this point to
Thus diving inwards, if one traces the source of the mind
Gambhiram Seshier. “Do not even for a moment lose sight
and reaches the Heart, one becomes the Sovereign Lord of
of the Self. Fixing the mind on the Self or the ‘I’ and abiding
the Universe. There is no more dreaming of such as in and
in the Heart is the perfection of yoga, meditation, wisdom,
out, right and wrong, birth and death, pleasure and pain,
devotion, and worship. Since the Supreme Being abides as
light and darkness, O boundless ocean of Grace and Light,
the Self, constant surrender of the mind by absorption in
Arunachala, dancing the dance of stillness in the dancing the Self is said to comprise all forms of worship.”12
Hall of the Heart.”7
This path is termed the direct path or the straight
Practicing the direct path of Ramana one has to re-
path because it is based on the truth that Self alone is,
member that Ramana was sharing his own experience, of
the One, the Whole. Other methods of meditation are
the day of enlightenment, and stressing that it can be ex-
based on the acceptance of the reality of the mind as an
perienced by everyone with an indrawn mind in search
entity apart from the Self. They are essentially dualistic.
of its source. A look once again on that epoch-making
The assumption of duality would be found to be illusory,
date July 17, 1896 would throw much light on the path. for this false notion ends when enquiry leads one back to
Facing the overwhelming fear of death Ramana passion- the mind’s source, the heart, where it merges. It is called
ately enquired into his true identity, into the question of meditation on the heart because one is seeking one’s con-
the nature of “I”-consciousness. He himself has termed scious source, the heart, which is the seat of conscious-
this enquiry as “Who am ‘I’?” enquiry. Reality was giv- ness.
en to the enquiry by putting aside the body as if it were The invaluable advantage of self-enquiry is that it
a corpse. Immediately, there was an upsurge of the feel- makes living in the present possible. Presently, in the
ing of “I,” distinct and apart from the dead body. Enquir- mental firmament there are many thoughts which are
ing further he discovered that the “I” was a current, a force carried forward based on memories of the experiences of
or center. Though it existed in connection with the body past action. There is also a heavy load of thoughts about
it was independent of the rigidity or activity of the the future rewound into the present. The past and future
body.8
thoughts, which are brought into the present by the in-
Based on this experience he later explained to his dividual’s attention, destroy the present, in which alone
disciples and seekers that the physical location of this all experience can take place. Self-enquiry, by cutting off
current is on the right hand side of the chest, two dig- all thoughts, enables one to escape from the time frame.
its from the center. He termed it the “spiritual heart” to One would live in the “now” experiencing fully each mo-
distinguish it from the physical heart on the left side. ment with thought-free exhilaration.
Just as the physical heart pumps blood through arteries, The common doubt is whether a meditative, re-
the energy of the “I”-consciousness of the divine current flective life where the mind is immersed in its source
is channeled through nadis, first to the mind and from is conducive to an active life in the world. Or is it open
there to the body. only to those who withdraw from the life current in a
We find Ramana laying great stress on the search single-minded pursuit of inwardness? As early as 1911,
within in his original work Ulladu Narpadu. This is also Ramana has clarified to Humphreys about the benefits
the case in most of his conversations with the disciples up of self-enquiry done even for a short time. He told him,
to the mid-thirties when the guru-disciple relationship, “Give yourself a quarter of an hour a day.... The results will
practically on a one to one basis, was possible. show themselves in four or five months time—in all sorts
112266\n--- 第140页 ---\nTimeless in Time
of unconscious clairvoyance, in peace of mind, in power to A: A person who has never seen an ocean must take a
deal with troubles, in power all round, always unconscious trip to it to know about it. Standing there before the huge
power.”13 expanse of water, this person may wish to bathe in the sea.
Of what use is it if, seeing the roaring and rolling of the
One Venkatarama Iyer questioned Ramana, in
waves, he were to just stand there thinking, “I shall wait for
Skandasramam days, whether combining activities and
all this to subside. When it does, I shall enter it for a quiet
Self-attention is possible.
bath just as in the pond back home”? He has to realize ei-
Q: Whichever way one turns, one finds that the mind
ther by himself or by being told that the ocean is restless
has to be subdued. We are told it has to be controlled.
and that it has been so from the moment of creation and
Can this really be done when on the one hand the mind will continue likewise till pralaya (destruction). He will
is an entity not easily grasped and on the other one con- then resolve to learn to bathe in it, as it is. He may wade
tinues to have worldly worries? into it and learn to duck under a wave and let it pass over
127\n--- 第141页 ---\nTimeless in Time
ways to be aware of the Self.
Everything is achieved if one
succeeds in this.”16
During the practice of
the Ramana Way one would
be in and out of the experi-
ence of the natural state and
its bliss. Knowledge and
ignorance would be inter-
mittent, and co-exist in this
transition stage. But as the
experience of the power of
the Self grows, the mind’s ca-
pacity to lure one away would
weaken. Ramana’s purpose
would have been done when
all straying ceases, when the
mind is merged in its source
firmly, without a break. Who
can describe the joy of such
a life?
A traveler on the spiri-
tual journey may wander
him. He would naturally hold his breath while doing so. around on indirect paths, may take detours, but in the
Soon he would be skilled enough to duck at a stretch, wave end he has to come to self-enquiry and the way of the
after wave, and thus achieve the purpose of bathing with- heart. The individual separated from his roots, from his
out coming to grief. The ocean may go on with its waves moorings, from his source, must inevitably get back to
and though in it, he is free from its grip. So too here.14 this true home as surely as the restless raindrops rejoin
Paul Brunton has also plied Ramana with questions their source, the ocean, or the birds return to earth from
on this point. which they have risen and hovered for a while in the sky.
Q: How is it possible to become selfless while leading N
a life of worldly activities?
A: There is no conflict between work and wisdom.
Q: Do you mean to say that one can continue all old Sadguru
activities, in one’s profession for instance, and at the same
time get enlightenment?
The Truth and the Way
A: Why not? But in that case one will be centered on
That, which is beyond the little self.15 O Aruna Hill, embodied love, loveless I was
The busiest hours will not be different from those And yet you chose to claim me as your own.…
earmarked for meditation. The current generated by as- If now you fail to fill me with love and if you let
sociation with the energy source in the heart would be Me perish in a loveless state, would it be fair?
the continuous substratum with its overflowing peace O joy which is my refuge, your will is mine. Here in
and joy. This surrender, is pure Joy, Lord of my Life.1
The habit of externalization of the mind is long in- —Bhagavan Ramana
grained. Till the experience of an inward way of life with
its beauty and bliss grows upon one there is need for If I died while yet clinging
steadfast practice. To use Ramana’s words: “Long cultivat- To your feet, it would be a standing pillar of
ed tendencies can indeed be eradicated by long continued Disgrace for you, O blazing light of Aruna Hill,
meditation.” He asks, “Can a man become a high officer expanse
by merely seeing such an officer once? … Can a beggar be- Of grace more subtle than ether.2
come a king by merely visiting a king and declaring himself —Bhagavan Ramana
one? … Gradually one should, by all possible means, try al-
112288\n--- 第142页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Most of Ramana’s compositions on Arunachala are auto- and which is so evident in his “Five Hymns”? Do we have
biographical. The dominant mood of all the eleven verses the intensity to discover the truth, to discover the source
of “Decad” from which these verses have been taken is of “I”-consciousness, which Ramana had on that memo-
one of love which brooks no barriers, which readily ac- rable day?
cepts the guru’s will, in the spirit of “Thy will be done.” Each person must pose these questions for himself
These verses, as also the Eight Verses seem to have a spe- and find the answers. To begin with, the mood of surren-
cial significance, for the words appeared before Ramana’s der to Ramana’s guidance and the certainty of his being
eyes and compelled him to put them down. The words the helmsman is not strong enough due to the enervation
arising in his pure mind were literally written down by caused by the externalized mind. Therefore the attitude
the Maharshi, seer of seers.
The moods alternate be-
tween gratitude for the love
showered and plaintive re-
quests to fulfill the longing
for overflowing oneness in
the heart.
Sadhu Natanananda has
elicited clear answers on two
important questions:
Q: What are the marks
of a sadguru?
A: Steady abidance in
the Self, looking at all with an
equal eye, unshakable cour-
age at all times, in all places,
circumstances etc.
Q: What are the marks
of an earnest disciple?
A: An intense longing for
the removal of sorrow and
attainment of joy.3
To this we may add, ear-
nestness in making the teach-
ings of sadguru Ramana in-
tegral to one’s life. From the
day of his enlightenment on
July 17, 1896, Ramana was
steadily abiding in the Self.
As for his equal treatment
and courage his life itself is
the testimony.
What of us, disciples
and devotees? Do we fit the
bill? Is our longing for a
new birth in the heart, for
becoming aware and re-
maining in the natural state
strong enough to sustain the
momentum on a long-term
basis? Do we have the kind
of passion which Ramana
had for his guru Arunachala
129\n--- 第143页 ---\nTimeless in Time
of surrender needs to be nurtured and developed in or- Ramana is there. Why doubt it? As long as the source
der that one’s faith in the omnipotence of guru Ramana of the “I” is not discovered the mind does not give up so
grows. His advice that, “it is the indefinable power of the easily and it keeps doubting. One may refer to the con-
lord that ordains, sustains, and controls everything,”4 must versation which Cohen had with Ramana. Cohen had
be watered to take root. Unfortunately the embattled ego resigned his job in Bombay and built himself a cottage
keeps showing its head in a negative form. The disciples next to the asram. However, on the day of housewarming
start judging their progress and, thinking it to be tardy, he prayed to Ramana that he should ensure his reaching
are inclined to find fault with Ramana for it. Sometimes the goal. Ramana gazed silently on the calm waters of the
they wonder why Ramana should not quicken the pace pond nearby and replied, “Your firm conviction brought
and make the spiritual practice easier, is the feeling you here, where is the room for doubt?”7 What an assur-
which overcomes them sometimes. One starts praying ance to him and to all disciples and devotees!
to Ramana to correct the situation and help out.5 We Ramana’s core teaching is that for the subsidence of
find Ramana pointing out that surrender would only the mind there is no means more effective and adequate
be a word which is lipped unless one is ready to give a than self-enquiry. Otherwise even though the mind sub-
general power of attorney to him. To quote, “Whether I sides, that is only apparently so, for it will rise again.8
do or don’t do anything you have to simply surrender and Ramana would also frequently remind the inmates and
keep quiet.”6 This is because Ramana is doing his job like attendants about the need for self-enquiry. He once
a mother who feeds her child when the child is asleep. told Kunjuswami, his attendant for many years, “There
The feeding has taken place but the child on waking up is no use saying, I am serving Sri Bhagavan.… The great-
says that it did not take anything the previous night. The est service to the guru is to be engaged in self-enquiry and
extraordinary, more than mother-like compassion of meditation in all sincerity.”9 Ramana would also stress the
113300\n--- 第144页 ---\nTimeless in Time
131\n--- 第145页 ---\nTimeless in Time
need for interweaving self-enquiry into all waking hours. put him wise by asking, “Where is your ticket? Is your
The idle time while traveling, waiting, and so on, can be conveyance waiting for you?” The ticket had been surren-
turned into self-enquiry time. If this is done it would re- dered at the station while exiting, the fare had been paid
sult in the guru’s grace being felt as an undercurrent all for the conveyance which had left. Ramana then pointed
the time, bringing him closer and strengthening inward- out that the railway ticket was useful till the journey was
ness. over, so too the conveyance. Similarly when the past sad-
The devotees however, do not seem to attach due hanas have outlived their purpose they should be allowed
significance to self-enquiry. Attachment to past practices to drop off as naturally as a ripe fruit from a tree.
and the fear of dropping them seem to come in the way. Lack of implicit faith in Ramana’s guidance has a
Actually, as Ramana has told some disciples, the past debilitating effect. For in the direct path one recognizes
practices have served their purpose in so far as they had that the goal is already there, that there are no interme-
prepared one for self-enquiry, which if diligently pursued diate steps and that the practice itself is the experience.
opens up the vast space of the mind and heart. This point Dependence on Ramana’s guidance is a must. For all
comes out clearly in a conversation which Ramana had their problems in sadhana everyone is sure that the entry
with Poonjaji. He had taken to repeating Lord Krishna’s of Ramana into their lives has made a world of difference.
name thousands of times, seeking joy through conversa- Its like sunshine breaking the darkness of one’s life for he
tions with the Lord and visions of Him. Then one day is “the light shining within, without, and everywhere.”10
all this came to a dead-stop. It ended with abrupt sud- Each individual alone can be aware of the bounty Ramana
denness. Though Poonjaji had earlier rejected Ramana’s is showering but there it is. It would appear that Ramana
counsel, on this occasion, when there was a spiritual cri- plays the game of hide-and-seek with his devotees, some-
sis in his life, he turned to him and made a beeline to the times so close, closer than the closest. Often one plays the
asram. There he narrated what had happened. Ramana eye-meeting game with Ramana when he looks out of the
113322\n--- 第146页 ---\nTimeless in Time
corner of his eyes, with his sidelong glance. And at other wily tricks of the mind. His feet stand guard “abolishing
times he is distant, far away, almost like his far away look, the dark night of ignorance with their pure radiance.”12
at twilight time when he is gazing into space. Ramana is ever ready, in fact one should say eager, to
What is Ramana doing when we are seemingly toil- bestow on his true disciples and devotees, holding stead-
ing on the path on the strength of our own might? fastly to a life dependent on his grace, his own state of
natural bliss. As one soaks more and more in his grace,
A rare, unlooked-for guest he came,
one joins in singing with Muruganar:
Right in he came, of his own accord,
This Venkata, Lord of my own self, What extravagance of grace! What extravagance!
And ate up the whole of my fond mind To hold me in this bliss, both mine and his
As if it were uncloying nectar.11 Together and apart.13
N
Ramana will not leave his task unfinished, or aban-
don one midway, half-baked and still tormented by the
133\n--- 第147页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Ramana’s Daily Miracles graduate with flying colors. They study for a couple of
minutes, gaze into the eyes of Ramana, and leave.”4
You asked me, did you not, to come to you? Very However, fate does not always give a forewarning. Its
well, I have come. Now you have to assume the blows are often swift and sudden. Therefore they cannot
burden of maintaining me. Go on suffering thus. It be anticipated or warded off by a prayer to Ramana in
is your fate to look after me, O Arunachala.1 advance or even at the time of their happening. For in-
—Bhagavan Ramana stance, a heart attack may happen with the speed of light-
ning. But Ramana is there as the family doctor giving
On his devoted head he carries
him the necessary presence of mind, in the intensive care
As if they were His own, all burdens
unit, making the doctors there take the right decision,
That His devotees should bear.
and also ensuring that the medicines prescribed are ef-
He tells me “Fear Not” and protects me,
fective. His job does not stop there. It is not a temporary
Ramana, the Lord of Aruna.2
reprieve which is provided, but a long term saving act.
—Muruganar
One can well understand why Ramana’s fame, as a giver
The best known adjective of Ramana is “Bhagavan.” This of boons unasked, remains bright and shining.
was given to him by Ganapati Muni in 1907 and it means Like a tree which on a scorching day
God. The Muni thought it to be a fit attribute to his guru Offers cool shade to every comer,
Ramana, because he was not only an abode of tranquil- By nature, not by choice,
ity, of peace, but also the storehouse of power in an equal Even so He stands,
measure. The scriptures attribute six-fold powers to God Calm, immutable, impartial,
which are plenitude, courage, renown, beauty, knowl- But saving all who reach his feet.5
edge, and dispassion. Ramana had all these in their full-
Ramana had blessed Muruganar with the gift of Self-
ness. For he was firmly rooted in the Self. It may also be
awareness. Since Ramana is such a munificent giver of
mentioned that in response to a specific query, Ramana
gifts, Muruganar suggests, “Why not pray for the biggest
has said that “for granting boons the jnani’s powers are the
same as Iswara’s or God’s.”3 prize, Self-knowledge? Why settle for less?” Of course it
is left to each one to pray according to his need. For to
When one is omnipotent like Ramana, and at the same
whom else can one turn in the hour of one’s need than
time filled with love which has no boundaries, it is only
to Ramana?
natural for a large cross-section of devotees to pray to him
Ramana’s miracles are daily occurrences like the sun-
for fulfillment of some desire or the other. A regular ob-
rise. Many who have experienced this would like to keep
server of what happens when shrine-goers visit Ramana’s
it a secret between themselves and Ramana. Fortunately
shrines of grace, is bound to notice a varied scene. “A
some of them have shared their experiences by giving a
lady comes, bows her head, and proceeds straight for the
first hand account of what happened.
tray containing the sacred ‘ashes’ and kumkum. She rev-
There is a need for clarifying Ramana’s theoretical
erentially applies the kumkum on her mangalasutra lost
position. Miracles fall into two broad categories. One is
in deep prayer. Perhaps her husband is ill. Ramana’s pro-
the miracle performed using mental power called siddhis.
tection is needed. A young couple in love walk in, hand
The exercise of such powers would deflect one from the
in hand, chatting. Suddenly a great silence comes over
goal of Self-knowledge by leading to a desire for name
them too. They kneel lost in prayer. Ramana has to unite
and fame, adulation and so on. More important is the fact
them in marriage. A small boy rushes in followed by his
that the enemy, the uncontrolled mind tossed about by
parents, garland in hand, to offer to Ramana for the well
innumerable thoughts, would remain to be understood.
being of the boy. It is the boy’s birthday. A middle-aged
The other category of miracles is non-mental. It does not
devotee enters, circumambulates the picture of Ramana,
involve the exercise of the mind at all. For in the pure
places a cover on the plate as his contribution. It is his
mind there are no desires. Ramana’s miracles are of this
mother’s death anniversary. Maybe Ramana’s motherly
type. The question is, how do they happen? All powers
care is on his mind. Another comes, places the plan of
are vested in a jnani. They are manifest automatically, for
a building in front of Ramana and stands for a few min-
saving all, “by nature not by choice.” Because that is God’s
utes. He is apparently about to invest his whole fortune in
way. Small wonder that Ramana is extolled as golden-
his residential building. Ramana’s blessing is needed for
handed for his “generous gifts fail not, even though the
its completion without a hitch. Three or four boys drop
in with books. They are making last minute preparations seasons fail.”6 N
for writing the forthcoming examination and hoping to
113344\n--- 第148页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Timeless in Time Those who were too close to these events could hard-
ly be blamed if they could not visualize what was in store
Can there be space, can there be time, except for even fifty years later, the beginning of the new millen-
me? nium, the year 2000. The growing presence of Ramana
Space and time bind me, only if I am the body, the world over is indicative of the shape of things to come
I am nowhere, I am timeless and his timelessness.
I exist everywhere and always.1 One could view the phenomenon of Ramana’s time-
—Bhagavan Ramana lessness in many ways. Firstly let us have a look at his hu-
man form, his tall handsome figure, his gentle smile, his
Ramana was born on December 30, 1879, in Tiruchuzhi, grace-filled lustrous eyes. It is evident that the imprint of
got enlightened at Madurai on July 17, 1896, arrived at these are very much there in the minds and hearts of the
Arunachala on September 1, 1896, and remained there people as much as, if not more intensely than, when he
till his mahanirvana on April 14, 1950. If one looks at the was physically in the body.
chronology, Ramana’s molten-gold body had a beginning There are over one thousand photographs of Ramana
in time and an ending in time. taken over fifty years, mostly by non-professionals, out
135\n--- 第149页 ---\nTimeless in Time
ticular photo might vary, their appeal
is universal. One person expresses
“their charm that every photograph
is ever new, yet always familiar.… It
is every face and all faces.… It is love
at first sight at every sight.”3 Be it the
large luminous eyes of his first photo
in 1900 when he was in Virupaksha
Cave or the powerful and penetrat-
ing eyes in Mani’s bust taken while at
Skandasramam in the early twenties
or those compellingly beautiful eyes
in the Welling photograph taken in
1948, it is the same story of an irre-
sistible magnetism.
When you look into his eyes like
a shy bride lifting her head to see the
bridegroom or when you exchange
furtive glances, his response is ter-
View of Arunachala from Ramanasramam
rific. Such abundance of grace pours
of which five hundred of them are in good condition or forth from those eyes floating one’s mind in bliss. Is not
have been restored to their original condition. This gal- the secret of this perennial charm of Ramana’s photo-
lery of Ramana’s photographs, spanning fifty years, has graphs and particularly those eyes to be found in his
infinite variety and one keeps “falling in love” with them. timelessness?
They have been taken most naturally while he was “walk- For, after his enlightenment, Ramana’s body radi-
ing, sitting, eating, wiping his feet and so on. He has been ated the power of God, of the Self, of Consciousness. The
snapped smiling, laughing, silent, or even in samadhi.”2 body of a Self-realized person becomes the “tabernacle
The attraction of a particular photo is of course different of the spirit” and the power of God shines in the body of
for different individuals. But while the choice of a par- such a person in all its majestic splendor. Though every
113366\n--- 第150页 ---\nTimeless in Time
pore of his body is filled with radiance it is best expressed Name, It will be doing its job of ripening one to be rid
through the eyes. of the dross, so that the inner pull of the Self would be
While his body has a human form in one sense, it felt strongly. Nurturing and protecting, it watches over
ceases to be perishable. It is for this reason that Ramana’s loving devotees, whose delusion is immolated in the vast
body was not cremated or buried in the usual way but fullness of final realization.”5
enshrined in a special structure in accordance with the While being aware of Ramana’s timeless presence,
time-honored prescribed rites for the samadhi of a Self- one has to remember his role as sadguru, as a guide on
realized person. The samadhi is a temple of God where the path, as an unfailing friend in the inner journey to the
one offers worship and derives worldly and spiritual heart. According to the scriptures the relationship with
gains. the guru may not be confined to a lifetime only. The gu-
Whether one accepts this explanation or not the fact ru’s grip on the ego-based, externalized life, is firm. One
remains that thousands of persons all over the world, cut- can compare it to the hold of the tiger’s jaw on its prey.
ting across all the geographical barriers, regard Ramana The guru will not leave his job half finished. Even as the
as the worshipful one. They of-
fer the flowers of love at his altar
where some photograph of his has
been reverentially placed.
What about his name? The
name always goes with the form. It
is ordinarily identified with a par-
ticular body. Not so Ramana’s. He
was named Venkataraman by his
parents in 1879. Ganapati Muni
to Ramana changed his name in
an expression of his gratitude as a
guru who revealed the truth to him.
He re-christened him as Bhagavan
Ramana Maharshi. Bhagavan is
an adjective to indicate that the
person has in him all the six-fold
powers of God.4 Maharshi means
a pre-eminent one among seers of
truth. The name itself was changed
from Venkataraman to Ramana.
This was in 1907. The new name
has different shades of meaning,
“dear darling,” “one who revels
in the Self,” “one who is the Self.”
It has been a magical name for
devotees and seekers. Just three
syllables “Ra,” “Ma,” “Na.” What
power to draw within and fix one
in the Self! The very name fills the
heart with delight. The power of
the name is such that though to
begin with it may be integral only
to meditation time, gradually the
remembrance of the name goes on
amidst all activities of life as well.
For the beauty of the name grows
on one. It becomes not just a name
but a name amongst names. “The
137\n--- 第151页 ---\nTimeless in Time
devotee stands on the “threshold of the womb,” Ramana absence of it makes no difference to it. None will be left
would pull him out. He would not let go until the disciple stranded midway to be lost among the teeming millions
too abides steadily in the natural state. He determines the of the world.
right pace of the spiritual evolution and checks the pulse The Self is the repository of all powers. For it is the
of the disciple’s progress. It cannot be accelerated for the totality of consciousness. Nothing exists apart from it.
devotee must be able to receive the grace. Therefore the Hence if one becomes steadily Self-aware, then without
guru’s job may extend over the entire life or many lives. any kind of seeking on his part—all powers of God are
Ramana being the deathless Self, the changes in the naturally in him. Hence such a person is “miraculously
disciple’s bodies, and the consequent changes in identifi- strong to save.”
cation which occurs from life to life, would make no dif- Ramana’s daily miracles are happening because the
ference. The disciple or devotee’s faith in reincarnation or automatic divine action is set in motion as soon as the
113388\n--- 第152页 ---\nTimeless in Time
matter is referred to him for protection and help. The continously performs, of course, is revealing the glory of
power of granting boons being an inherent power in the Self-Knowledge.
jnani, there would be quite a spate of appeals and prayers One could always turn to the original works and to
to him for a multiplicity of boons. All those facing a any of the recorded talks as one would to the teachings of
dead-end situation in which they feel utterly helpless take Mahavira, Gautama Buddha, or the sacred Bible, Quran,
recourse in Ramana, in the faith that he is omnipotent Collected Works of Adi Sankara, Granth Sahib, and the
Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, which have been providing
and can grant their prayers. And he does grant, not by
courage and strength to millions. The simple and direct
wishing to do so but because it is the divine law. He has
teaching of Ramana, which opens up the floodgates of
become a channel for the divine’s grace. Any number of
joy, is perhaps the most important reason for Ramana’s
seekers have been recipients of Ramana’s secret or overt
timelessness. Truth has been made so easily accessible,
help in response to prayers. Here it has to be mentioned
so unbelievably close, so experientially possible for each
that Ramana’s rescue acts do not even require any aware-
and every one that the fascination of Ramana’s teachings
ness on the part of the recipient or request from the per-
is irresistible. More and more, in ever increasing num-
son. For, coming events need not always cast their shad-
bers, are drawn to him and his teachings. This is bound
ows. The act of grace often precedes faith. to be so for centuries to come.6
In the post-nirvana period these miracles continue
The growing universal presence of Ramana because
unabated and are on the increase, they are happening day
of his attraction to human beings, irrespective of geo-
in and day out. It would quite obviously be an error to
graphical, racial, or other barriers, is very much there
think that there may be a full stop at any point of time
for one to see. Books on his life and teachings are be-
in the future for the manifestation of Ramana’s power ing translated from English to various others languages;
under varied and impossible circumstances. It is univer- the translations of Be the Self, The Silent Mind, Ramana
sally known that problems in life turn up unexpectedly Gita, and Absolute Consciousness illustrate this. There are
every now and then. The devotees of Ramana cannot Ramana Centers and study circles which have become
therefore be blamed if they too join the bandwagon of beacon lights to many earnest seekers.
boon seekers, confirmed as they are in Ramana’s capac- Ramana’s love was universal. It embraced all life, yet
ity to grant them. The greatest miracle which Ramana it was at the same time particular as well. Every disciple
139\n--- 第153页 ---\nTimeless in Time
and devotee felt in the past, feels now, and is bound to The mystique of Ramana is inexplicable. The
feel in the future that in some special sense Ramana be- scene is in Yugoslavia. Those are the first few days of
longs to them. One relates to him even more intimately NATO’s bombing raids. A Ramana devotee, Slobodanka
than they would to those whom they regard as their near Arunachala, feels as never before Ramana’s love for her
and dear ones. In so many touching ways which baffle and an unshaken confidence in his protection. “A feel-
understanding, Ramana would demonstrate his love for ing which was neither sought nor prayed for but felt.” For
each person, drawing them to him irresistibly. Eleanor another devotee, Nebojsa, also in bomb-torn Yugoslavia,
Pauline Noye comes to Ramanasramam in search of a “his illusions slowly disappear as he wonders how strange
way out of depression. Ramana greets her tenderly and it is that under Ramana’s shining sun we are able to value
makes some enquiries to put her at ease. “His look of love our little selves so much. Above all he discovers that true
and compassion was a benediction that went straight peace can be found only within, even quickly, and that
to my heart.”7 During her stay of eight months in 1940, outer events of life have their own course which need not
she would be moved by his tender acts. Once she kept a disturb our inner peace.”9
beautiful rose as an offering at the small footstool near Before returning to Bangalore, Ananthamurthy, one
the couch. Ramana “took and touched it with his fore- of Ramana’s biographers, sought Ramana’s continued
head and cheeks moving her to tears.”8 At the time of her benediction even while at Bangalore. Ramana replied in
departure, being fully aware of the emotional turmoil she English, “What? Is there time, place, or distance for me?” Is
was undergoing, Ramana read out to her a few comforting he not the all-pervasive enlightened one, steadily abiding
passages from Psalms, Chapter 139, Verses 7, 8, 9, and 10. in the Self, beyond time and space?
N
114400\n--- 第154页 ---\nTimeless in Time
141\n--- 第155页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Notes and References
PUBLISHER’S PREFACE MADURAI YEARS
1. Frithjof Schuon, Language of the Self, pp. 40-41. 1. Iyer, N.R. Krishnamurthi: “Sri Bhagavan’s Boyhood in Madurai,” in Ramana
Smrti, pp.78-80.
INTRODUCTION
2. Greenblatt et al: Pictorial Biography, p.9.
1. Master Nome: Timeless Presence, p.11.
3. This was the room in which Ramana became enlightened on July 17, 1896.
2. Publisher’s Note: This, the third book of the trilogy, was eventually published
4-5. Iyer, N.R. Krishnamurthi: Ramana Smrti, pp.78-80.
in 2002.
6. Greenblatt et al: Pictorial Biography, p.8.
3. Muruganar: “Proper Placing,” in Homage to the Presence, vv.107-116, pp.9-11.
7. Nagamma, Suri: Letters entry dt.8.3.49. In the Vedic hymn “Namakam,”
SECTION I Rudra (Siva) is called hiranya bahu (golden-handed).
WHO ARE YOU RAMANA? 8. Greenblatt et al: Pictorial Biography, p.9.
1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Miscellaneous Verses,” in Collected Works, p.150. 9. Osborne, Arthur: Ramana Maharshi, p.4.
2. Muraganar: “Glory of Ramana” (Ramana Vaibhavam), in Songs, v.1, p.65. 10. Greenblatt et al: Pictorial Biography, p.10.
3. Natarajan, A.R. (tr.): Sat-Darshanam, v.31, p.35.
THE DAY BEFORE
4. Refer to “Advent at Arunachala” under Section I.
1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Eleven Verses to Sri Arunachala,” in Collected Works, v.8,
5. “From my unthinking childhood, the immensity of Arunachala had shone in
pp.105-106.
my awareness.…”
2. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers, an interview with Ramana recorded on
6. Bhagavan Ramana: “Ashtakam,” in Five Hymns, v.1, p.124. Narasimha Swami,
8.1.31.
B.V.: Self Realization, pp.106-107.
3. Natarajan, A.R., (tr.): The Book of Daily Worship (Sri Ramana Astottara),
7. Noye, Eleanor Pauline: “My Pilgrimage to Sri Ramanasramam,” Golden
p.16. “The operation of Grace for spiritual ripening is termed Sakti nipata.
Jubilee Souvenir, p.447.
It destroys ignorance and awakens one to the knowledge that the entire
8. Iyer, Sundaresa: At the Feet of Bhagavan, p.9.
universe is permeated by divine light.”
9. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.120.
4-5. Refer to chapter “Dindigal—Self-Enquiry Begins” under Section I.
10. Ganapati Muni: Forty Verses in Praise of Ramana, p.15.
6. Refer to chapter “Born With a Purpose” under Section I.
11-12. Bhagavan Ramana: Upadesa Undiyar, p.5.
13. Natarajan. A.R.: Ramana Gita, pp.130, 226. ENLIGHTENMENT—JULY 17, 1896
14. Refer to “In Obedience to Father’s Command” under Section I. 1. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.20, 21.
15. Refer to “Advent to Arunachala” under Section I. 2. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers.
16. Brunton, Paul and Venkataramiah, Munagala (Recorded): Conscious 3. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.22.11.45.
Immortality, p.137. 4-6 Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers.
17. Ganapati Muni: Forty Verses in Praise of Ramana, p.16. 7. Natarajan, A.R. (tr. and com.): Sri Ramana Sahasranama, p.1.
18. Muruganar: “Ramana Deva Malai,” in The Mountain Path, v.180. 8. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.31.
19. Vinobha Bhave, The Mountain Path, v.180. 9. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day By Day, entry dt.4.10.46.
20. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.62. 10. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p.270.
21. Bhagavan Ramana: “Decad,” in Five Hymns, v.5, p.104. THE FATHER’S COMMAND
TIRUCHUZHIAL—BIRTH PLACE OF SRI RAMANA 1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Marital Garland of Letters,” in Five Hymns, v.70, p.47.
1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Occasional Verses,” in Collected Works, p.152. 2. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p.28.
2. Rajan, N.N: “Tiruchuzhi—The Birth Place of Ramana,” in The Mountain Path, 3-4. Narasimha Swami, B.V., Papers, “Scenes from Ramana’s Life,” K.K. Ganapati
January 1966, p.13. Sastriar, Kapali Sastriar and his wife Parvathiammal, interview dt.14.10.29.
3. Devasenapathi, Dr. V.: “Tiruchuzial,” The Mountain Path, January 1986, ADVENT AT ARUNACHALA
pp.20, 21. 1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Marital Garland of Letters,” in Five Hymns, v.108, p.63.
4. Greenblatt et al: Bhagavan Sri Ramana, p.5. 2. Refer to chapter “The Thirties and the Forties,” under Section V.
BLISSFUL PARENTS 3. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.2.9.46.
1. Iyer, Sundaram: “A Schoolmate’s Reminiscences,” in The Mountain Path, 4-6. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.12.4.48.
January 1980, p.41. SECTION II
2-4. Iyer, Ramaswamy P.K: “Bhagavan’s Father,” in The Mountain Path, July 1980, THE PENANCE
p.134. 1. Ganapati Muni.: Ramana Gita—Dialogues, v.18, p.132.
5. T.P.R.: “Sri. Bhagavan’s Father,” in The Mountain Path, 1989, p.3. 2. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.31 and Mudaliar,
6. Bhagavan Ramana: “Marital Garland of Letters,” in Five Hymns, v.2, p.23. A. Devaraja, Day by Day, entry dt.4.10.46 and 22.11.45.
BORN WITH A PURPOSE 3. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p.48.
1. Ramana: “Necklet of Nine Gems,” in Five Hymns, v.8, p.85. 4-5. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers.
2. Ganapati Muni: “Life of Sri Ramana Maharshi,” in The Mountain Path, GURUMURTAM
January 1979, p.11. 1. Ganesan, V.: Moments Remembered, pp.105, 106.
3. Osborne, Arthur: Ramana Maharshi, p.2. 2. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self Realization, pp.51, 52.
4. Bhagavan Ramana: “Astakam,” in Five Hymns, v.1, p.124. 3. Ganesan, V.: Moments Remembered, pp.105, 106.
5. Bhagavan Ramana: “Arunachala Mahatmya,” in Collected Works, p.85. 4. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers.
6. Bhagavan Ramana: “Necklet of Nine Gems,” in Five Hymns, v.9, p.85. 5-8. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.52-58.
7. Viswanatha Swami: “Revelations of the Vedic Rishis,” in The Mountain Path,
1975. ARUNAGIRINATHAR TEMPLE—PACHAIAMMAN KOIL
8. Bhagavan Ramana: “Arunachala Mahatmya,” in Collected Works, pp.84, 85. 1. Ganapati Muni: Forty Verses, v.5.
2. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.30.5.46.
EARLY YEARS 3. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.27.11.47.
1-4. Ganapati Muni: “The Life of Sri Ramana Maharshi,” in The Mountain Path, 4. Ibid, entry dt.27.6.47.
pp.8-12. 5. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja, Day by Day, entry dt.1.2.46, afternoon.
5. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.3.6.46.
6. Osborne, Arthur: Ramana Maharshi, p.4. SECTION III
7. Greenblatt et al: Pictorial Biography, p.6. VIRUPAKSHA YEARS, 1899-1916
1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Occasional Verses,” in Collected Works, p.152.
DINDIGAL—SELF-ENQUIRY BEGINS 2. In view of the significance and importance of the relationship between
1. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.1.2.46. Ramana and mother Azhagammal, and her liberation, a separate chapter
2-3. Ibid, entry dt.31.5.46. on Mother Azhagammal has been included.
4. Brunton, Paul and Venkataramiah Munagala (Recorded): Conscious 3. See chapter “Vasishta Ganapati Muni” under this section.
Immortality, p.68. 4. See chapters “Gambhiram Seshier” and “Sivaprakasam Pillai” under this section.
142\n--- 第156页 ---\nNotes and References
5. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.2.5.46, morning. 14-15. Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta Vaibhovam, tr. G.V. Kulkarni (unpublished
6. Bhagavan Ramana: “Occasional Verses,” in The Collected Works, p.94. manuscript).
7. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.26.10.45, morning. 16. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): “Physical Presence at Two Places,” in Miracles, p.1.
8. Ibid, entry dt.9.12.45, morning. 17. Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta Vaibhavam, tr. G.V. Kulkarni (unpublished
9. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.10.10.48. manuscript).
10. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.5.6.45, afternoon. 18. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): “Physical Presence at Two Places,” in Miracles, p.1.
11. Ibid, entry dt.1.2.46, morning. 19. Refer to “Muruganar” under Section V.
12. Ibid, entry dt.5.10.46. 20. Natarajan. A. R. (tr. and com.): Sat-Darshanam, v.42, p.47.
13-14. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.21.8.46. 21. Natarajan, A.R. (tr. and com.): Introduction in Sat-Darshanam.
15. Mahadevan, T.M.P.: Ramana Maharshi, pp.38, 39. 22. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.18.4.47.
16. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.25.1.47. 23. Reddy, N. Balarama: My Reminiscences, p.63.
17. Ibid, entry dt.19.8.46. 24. Venkataramiah, Munagala: Talks, entry dt.20.1.37.
25. Natarajan, A.R.: “Muni and the Maharshi,” in The Inner Circle, p.28.
THE MOST SIGNIFICANT EVENT AFTER ENLIGHTENMENT
1-2. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.269-270. F.H. HUMPHREYS
3. Refer to “Enlightenment, July 17, 1896” under Section I. 1. Humphreys, Frank. H.: Glimpses, p.7.
4. Cohen, S.S.: “Part II—Talks,” in Guru Ramana, 25th April, 1937, p.85. 2-3. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.111-112.
4-5. Humphreys, Frank. H.: Glimpses, p.19.
ARUNACHALA
1. Tagare, Dr. G.V. (tr. and annotation): The Skanda Purana—Part-III, vv.17-20, LESSER KNOWN DEVOTEES OF RAMANA
p.44. 1. Sadananda, Ramana Dasa: Sri Ramana Stuti Dasakam, p.46.
2. Ibid, Chapter 5, vv. 67b-71, p.30. 2. Ibid, pp.33, 34.
3. Ibid, Chapter 7, v. II, p.44. 3. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers. Also see Greenblatt et al, Pictorial Biography,
4. Ibid, Chapter 5, vv.33-39a, p.28. p.54.
5. Venkataramiah, Munagala: Talks, entry dt.8.5.38.
SACRED HANDS
6. Godman, David: “Bhagavan’s Deposition on Arunachala,” in The Mountain
1. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.30.12.45.
Path, 1990, p.14.
2. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p. 47.
7. Bhagavan Ramana: “Significance of Arunachala,” in Collected Works, p.84.
3. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.12.4.48.
8. Bhagavan Ramana: ‘Significance of the Beacon,” in Collected Works, p.85.
4. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p.49.
9. Bhagavan Ramana: “Marital Garland of Letters,” in Five Hymns, v.19, p.29.
5. Ibid, pp.100-102.
10. Ibid, v.63, p.44.
6. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.21.1.46.
11. Ibid, “Ashtakam,” v.1, p.124.
7. Godman, David: Living by the Words of Bhagavan, p.75.
12. Butler, Robert: “Annamalai Venba,” in The Mountain Path, pp.18-22.
13. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.30.10.45. RAMANA’S MOTHER AZHAGAMMAL
14. Bhagavan Ramana: “Necklet of Nine Gems,” in Five Hymns, v.8, p.85. 1. Natarajan, A.R.: Bhagavan Ramana and Mother, Chapters 1 and 2.
15. Mahadevan, T.M.P.: Ramana Maharshi, p.34. 2. Natarajan, A.R.: Insights, p.58.
16. “‘A mile per hour alone should all now walk’ said he who over earth and 3-4. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.61, 62.
heavens holds sway.…”; refer to “Ramana Dasa Sadananda” under chapter 5-6. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, pp.358-360.
“Lesser Known Devotees of Ramana.” 7-14. Natarajan, A.R.: Bhagavan Ramana and Mother, pp.11-31.
17. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.26.6.49. 15. Ramaswamy, Dr. S. (tr): The Guru and the Disciple, p.22.
18-19. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.173, 180. 16. Natarajan, A.R.: Bhagavan Ramana and Mother, p.39.
20-22. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: My Recollections of Bhagavan Sri Ramana, pp. 17. See above reference which clarifies this point.
69-72. 18. Natarajan, A.R.: Bhagavan Ramana and Mother, p.40.
23. Ibid, p.65. 19. Godman, David: Living by the Words of Bhagavan, p.41.
24. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.30.11.47. 20. Reddy, N. Balarama: My Reminiscences, p.79.
21. Sadhu Arunachala: Sadhu’s Reminiscences, p.59.
GAMBHIRAM SESHIER
22. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.25.3.49.
1-2. “‘Self Enquiry’ and ‘Who am I?’: A History and Evaluation,” editorial in: The
23. Ibid, pp.398-399.
Mountain Path, January 1982, pp.1-3.
24-25. Sadhu Arunachala: Sadhu’s Reminiscences, p.60.
3-4. Bhagavan Ramana: Collected Works, pp.5-6, 12-13.
26. Sastry T.V. Kapali: “Significance of Maha pooja,” in The Mountain Path, July
SIVAPRAKASAM PILLAI 1987, p.170.
1. “‘Self Enquiry’ and ‘Who am I?’: A History and Evaluation,” editorial in: The
SECTION IV
Mountain Path, January 1982, pp.1-5.
SKANDASRAMAM YEARS, 1916-1922
2. Bhagavan Ramana: The Collected Works, pp.39-40.
1. Natarajan, A.R.: Bhagavan Ramana and Mother, p.31.
3. Ibid, p.45.
2. Godman, David: “Bhagavan’s Deposition on Arunachala,” in The Mountain
VASISHTA GANAPATI MUNI Path, p.14.
1. Shankaranarayan, S.: Bhagavan and Nayana, p.89. 3. Ananthamurthy, T.S.: Life and Teachings, pp.105-107.
2. Ibid, pp.27, 28. 4. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.25.11.45.
3. Though greatly drawn to Ramana, because of the luster of his tapas, the Muni 5. Kunju Swami: Reminiscences, pp.69, 70.
was not yet ready to surrender to him. 6. Venkataramiah, Munagala: Talks, entry dt.16.10.35.
4. Ramaswamy, Dr. S. (tr): The Guru and the Disciple; Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta
SADHU NATANANANDA
Vaibhavam, p.3.
1. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.217, 223.
5. Leela S.R. (tr): Glory of Vasishta Ganapati Muni; Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta
2-7. Ibid.
Vaibhavam, p.86.
8. Kunju Swami: Reminiscences, p.164.
6. Ramaswamy, Dr. S. (tr): The Guru and the Disciple, p.7.
9. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p.224.
7. Natarajan. A.R. (tr): The Book of Daily Worship, attribute nos.2, 52, 53, pp.2,
10. Bhagavan Ramana: Collected Works, pp.51-79.
45, 46.
8. Ramaswamy, Dr. S. (tr): The Guru and the Disciple, p.7. SECTION V
9. Natarajan, A.R. (tr. and com.): Ramana Gita—Dialogues, Introduction, THE LIBERTY HALL
Natarajan, A.R. p.4. 1. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.28.5.46.
10. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.30.4.48. 2. Narasimha Swami B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.187, 188.
11. Letter dt.6.6.32 from Kapali Sastri to Viswanatha Swami, Library. 3-4. Brunton, Paul: A Search in Secret India, pp. 290-291.
12. Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta Vaibhavam, tr. G.V. Kulkarni (unpublished 5. Ananthamurthy, T.S.: Life and Teachings, p.137.
manuscript). 6. Pillai, Ramaswami: “How I Came to Bhagavan,” in The Mountain Path, July
13. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p.92. 1981, pp.145, 146.
143\n--- 第157页 ---\nTimeless in Time
7. Refer to “F.H. Humphreys” under Section III, “Virupaksha Years.” 6: Ibid, pp.330-332.
8. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: “Scenes from Ramana’s Life,” in The Mountain Path,
SOME WESTERN DEVOTEES
January 1980, pp.19, 20.
1. Brunton, Paul: “Dedication,” in Message of Arunachala, B.I. Publications, New
9. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: “Reminiscences of Srinivasa Gopala Iyengar,”
Delhi.
Narasimha Swami’s papers, dt.30.1.30.
2. Brunton, Paul: A Search in Secret India, p.131.
10. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: “Scenes from Ramana’s Life—III,” in The Mountain
3. Ibid, p.145.
Path, October 1980, p.159.
4. Ibid, p.156.
11. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: “A Dialogue with Maharshi—III,” in The Mountain
5. Ibid, p.280.
Path, January 1983, p.36.
6. Ibid, p.305.
12. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers.
7. Ibid, p.310.
ROBBERS WORSHIP RAMANA 8-9. Piggot, M.A.: “The Way of the Spirit,” in Forever is in the Now, pp.132-137.
1-4. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, pp.153-155. 10. De Acosta, Mercedes: Here Lies the Heart, p.294.
11. Ibid, p.296.
RAMANA IN THE KITCHEN
12-13. Ibid, pp.299-301.
1. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.72.
14. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.14.10.46.
2-3. Sampoornamma: Unforgettable Years, RMCL, 1997, p.66.
15. Osborne, Arthur: For Those With Little Dust, Ramana Publications, Florida,
4-6. Santamma: Unforgettable Years, pp.71-72.
1990, dedication page.
7. Subbalakshmiamma: Unforgettable Years, pp.86-87.
16-17. Ibid, p.5.
8-10. Ibid, p.92.
18. Ibid, p.8.
EQUALITY IN THE DINING HALL
THE THIRTIES AND THE FORTIES
1. Natarajan, A.R. (ed): Unforgettable Years, p.7.
1. The record of Ramana’s talks with devotees and visitors is covered in the
2. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, pp.291, 292.
following books:
3. Natarajan, A.R. (ed): Unforgettable Years, p.73.
a) Venkataramiah, Munagala: Talks, SRA.
4. Ibid, pp.88, 90.
b) Brunton, Paul and Venkataramiah, Munagala (recorded by): Conscious
5. Ibid, p.96.
Immortality, SRA.
6-8. Yogi; Chhaganlal V.: “Living with Ramana Maharshi,” in Living with
c) Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, SRA, Talks in Part II (65 pages).
Ramana Maharshi, p.7.
d) Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day with Bhagavan, SRA.
KINDER YOU ARE THAN ONE’S OWN MOTHER e) Rajan, N.N.: More Talks with Ramana Maharshi, RMCL (180 pages).
1. Reddy, N. Balarama: “My Recollections of Sri Bhagavan Ramana Maharshi,” in f) Annamalai Swami: Living by the Words of Bhagavan (45 pages diary), Sri
Living with Ramana Maharshi, p.15. Annamalai Ashram Trust.
2. Kunju Swami: Reminiscences, p.18. 2. Sastry, Kapali: “Leaves from a Diary,” in The Maharshi, entry dt.2.4.50, p.155.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7 (nos. 8, 9, 10, 13, 16 in the 2002 edition): missing from original text. 3-4. Rajan, N.N.: More Talks, entry dt.18.3.38 to 23.9.38.
5. Subbaramayya, G.V: Sri Ramana Reminscences, p.147.
IDENTIFICATION WITH THE POOR, HUMBLE, AND THE MEEK
6. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.8.9.46.
1. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, pp.326, 327.
7. Refer to “Mother Azhagammal” under Section III.
2-3. Ibid, pp.424-427.
4. Chalam: “What I Have Seen and Heard,” in Unforgettable Years, p.3. VICARIOUS PENANCE
5. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.73. 1. Muruganar: Sri Ramana Sannidhi Murai, SRA, 1993, vv.1419, 1420, p.374.
6. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, pp.391-394. 2. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.22.2.49.
7. Iyer, T.P. Ramachandra: Unforgettable Years, pp.32-34. 3. Ibid, entry dt.27.3.49.
4. Ibid, entry dt.18.4.49.
ONE CONSCIOUSNESS 5. Ibid, entry dt.1.5.49.
1. Mudaliar A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.26.2.46. 6. Ibid, entry dt.7.8.49.
2. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.24.10.47. 7. Ibid, entry dt.19.12.49.
3. On a similar note Ramana would joke, “When these attendants are immersed
in deep meditation, the monkeys come and see to the work of the attendants. DEVOTEES PANIC—RAMANA’S RESPONSE
Someone has to look after the work. The attendants put the fruits into the 1. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.6.7.49.
basket, the monkeys put the fruit into their stomachs; that is all the difference” 2. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.193.
(Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.25.10.47). 3. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.25.6.49.
4. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Self-Realization, p.168. 4. Ibid, entry dt.20.4.49.
5. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.26.8.48. 5. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: “Sundaresa Iyer— Reminiscences,” in Papers,
6. The Call Divine (monthly), M.N. Swami, Bombay, vol.10, p.52. statement recorded 14.1.30.
7. Mallet, Pascaline: “Knowing Eternity,” in Forever is in the Now, p.113. 6. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.23.1.49.
8-9. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.22.5.49. 7. Subbaramayya, G.V: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, p.209.
10-13. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.20.4.47. 8. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.12.4.50.
14. Ramana has also described the love that a peahen showed towards him 9-10. Viswanatha Swami: The Last Days and Mahanirvana, pp.6, 7.
during the Skandasram days. “The peahen always used to sleep on my lap.... DID RAMANA SUFFER? HIS ATTITUDE TO DARSAN
She was very familiar with me. The peacock used to call her to accompany 1. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, Talks Part II, XV—The Jnani—The Awakened,
him wherever he went out, but like a little child, she would never leave me June 1938.
and go” (Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.26.8.48). 2. Iyer, R. Narayana: “The Great Event,” in The Mountain Path, July 1969, p.182.
15. Iyer, T.K. Sundaresa: At the Feet of Bhagavan, pp.48, 49. 3. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.12.4.50.
16. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.18.1.46. 4. Ibid, entry dt.2.8.49.
17. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.22.11.45, afternoon. 5. Viswanatha Swami: Last Days and Mahanirvana, pp.8, 9.
18. Osborne, Arthur: Ramana Maharshi, p.99. 6. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.12.4.50.
19. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, entry dt.1.1.46.
MAHANIRVANA
20. Iyer, T.K. Sundaresa: At the Feet of Bhagavan, p.6.
1. Osborne, Arthur: Ramana Maharshi, p.174.
21. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day, entry dt.10.12.45.
2. Swami Satyananda: “How I Have Been Serving Bhagavan,” in The Mountain
22. Brunton, Paul and Venkataramaiah, Munagala (recordists): Conscious
Path, January 1973, p.44.
Immortality, p.18.
3. Iyer, R. Narayana: “The Great Event,” in The Mountain Path, July 1969, p.181.
LIBERATION OF COW LAKSHMI
SAMADHI FUNCTION AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE SAMADHI
1. Bhagavan Ramana: Collected Works, p.157.
1. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.15.4.50.
2. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: The Cow, pp.2-3.
3. Mallet, Pascaline: “Knowing Eternity,” in Forever is in the Now, p.114. SECTION VI
4-5. Nagamma, Suri: Letters, pp.328-329. THE POST-NIRVANA SCENE
144\n--- 第158页 ---\nBibliography
1. Osborne, Arthur: The Last Days and Maha-Nirvana, p.2. 5. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: My Recollections of Ramana Maharshi, p.117.
2. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, entry dt.12.4.50. 6. Ibid, p.119.
3. Keers, Wolter A.: “What of Us, after He Went?” in The Mountain Path, July 7. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, p.18.
1975, p.141. 8. Bhagavan Ramana: Upadesa Saram, v.13, pp.23-25, also: Ramana Gita—
Dialogues, chapters VI and VII, pp.62-86.
THE CONTINUING STORY
9. Kunju Swami: Reminiscences, p.121.
1. Osborne, Arthur: The Last Days and Maha-Nirvana, p.31.
10. Ganapati Muni: Forty Verses in Praise of Ramana, v.22, p.11.
2. Brunton, Paul: “The Impact,” in Forever is in the Now, p.188.
11. Muruganar: “Decad of Journey,” in Songs, p.77.
3. Greenlees, Duncan: “The Everpresent,” in The Mountain Path, 1966, p.109.
12. Butler, Robert (tr.): “Seventy Verses in Praise of the Guru’s Holy Feet,” in
4. Cohen S.S.: “Ramana Satguru,” in The Mountain Path, January, 1966, p.88.
Non-dual Consciousness, RMCL, 1998, v.609, p.103.
TEACHINGS 13. Muruganar: “Magician Ramana,” in Songs, p.57.
1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Eight Verses,” in Five Hymns, p.128.
2. Bhagavan Ramana: “Five Verses,” in Five Hymns, v.2, p.138. RAMANA’S DAILY MIRACLES
3. Bhagavan Ramana: “Self Enquiry,” in The Collected Works, p.28. 1. Bhagavan Ramana: “Marital Garland of Letters,” in Five Hymns, p.56.
4. Ibid, p.31. 2. Prof. K. Swaminathan (tr.): Homage, p.87.
5. Bhagavan Ramana: “Who am I?” in Collected Works, pp.39-52. 3. Natarajan, A.R.: “On the Glory of Siddhas,” in Ramana Gita—Dialogues, v.23,
6. Brunton, Paul and Venkataramiah, Munagala (eds.), Conscious Immortality, p.229.
p.66. 4. Natarajan, A.R.: “Invoking Ramana’s Grace,” in Insights, p.103.
7. Bhagavan Ramana: “Eight Verses,” in Five Hymns, v.7, p.127. 5, 6 (13, 14 in the 2002 edition): missing from original text.
8. Narasimha Swami, B.V.: Papers. TIMELESS IN TIME
9. Natarajan. A.R. (tr.): Sat-Darshanam, v.29, p.35. 1. Natarajan, A.R. (tr.): Sat-Darshanam, p.19.
10. Ibid, v.30, p.35. 2. Natarajan, A.R.: “The Stamp of Eternity,” in Radiance of the Self, RMCL, 1998,
11. Bhagavan Ramana: Upadesa Saram, v.10, p.19. p.ii.
12. Bhagavan Ramana: “Self-Enquiry,” in Collected Works, p.29. 3. Dr. Sarada: “Falling in Love,” in Radiance of the Self, p.vi.
13. Humphreys, F.H.: Glimpses, p.19. 4. Viswanatha Swami: Book of Daily Worship, p.46.
14. “Maharshi in our Midst,” in The Mountain Path, p.49. 5. Muruganar: Non-dual Consciousness, “Seventy Verses in Praise of the Guru’s
15. Brunton, Paul: A Search in Secret India, pp.156, 157. Holy Feet,” vv.625, 629, p.106.
16. Bhagavan Ramana: “Self-Enquiry,” in Collected Works, p.30. 6. Natarajan, A.R.: Ramana Maharshi—The Living Guru, pp.1-13.
SADGURU 7. Noye, Eleanor Pauline: “My Pilgrimage to Sri Ramanasramam,” in Golden
1. Bhagavan Ramana: “The Decad,” in Five Hymns, v.2, p.102. Jubilee Souvenir, p.442.
2. Ibid, v.6, p.104. 8. Ibid, pp.448, 449.
3. Bhagavan Ramana: “Spiritual Instruction,” in Collected Works, p.53. 9. The Maharshi, a bi-monthly, New York: Arunachala Ashrama.
4. Bhagavan Ramana: The Collected Works, Rider, p.45.
Bibliography
Primary Sources (in the order referred to in the Book)
1. Narasimha Swami, B.V: Self-Realization—The Life and Teachings of Sri 23. Nagamma, Suri: Letters from Sri Ramanasramam, tr. D.S. Sastri, SRA, 1985.
Ramana Maharshi, Sri Ramanasramam (SRA), Tiruvannamalai, 1996. 24. Viswanatha Swami: The Book of Daily Worship, tr. A.R. Natarajan, RMCL,
2. Osborne, Arthur: Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge, SRA, 1996.
1970. 25. Sastri, Jagadeeswara: Sri Ramana Sashasranama, tr. and commentary by A.R.
3. Swaminathan, K: Ramana Maharshi, National Book Trust, India, 1996. Natarajan, RMCL, 1996.
4. Mahadevan, T.M.P.: Ramana Maharshi—The Sage of Arunachala, George 26. Ganesan, V.: Moments Remembered, SRA, 1990.
Allen & Unwin, London, 1977. 27. Iyer, Satyamangalam Venkatarama: Sri Ramana Stuti Panchakam, SRA,
5. Master Nome: Timeless Presence, Society for Abidance in Truth, U.S.A, 1996. 1977.
6. Muruganar: Homage to the Presence, tr. Prof. K. Swaminathan, SRA, 1977. 28. Cohen, S.S.: Guru Ramana, SRA, 1998.
7. Bhagavan Ramana: The Collected Works of Ramana Maharshi, SRA, 1996. 29. Tagare, Dr. G.V.: The Skanda Purana-Part III, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,
8. Muruganar: Songs from Sri Muruganar’s Ramana Sannidhi Murai, Ramana 1993.
Kendra, New Delhi, 1975. 30. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): The Inner Circle, RMCL, 1996.
9. Bhagavan Ramana: Five Hymns to Arunachala and Other Poems of Bhagavan 31. Shankaranarayan, S: Bhagavan and Nayana, SRA, 1997.
Sri Ramana Maharshi, tr. Prof. K. Swaminathan, Ramana Kendra, New 32. Humphreys, F.H.: Glimpses of the Life and Teachings of Bhagavan Sri
Delhi, 1977. Ramana Maharshi, SRA, 1996.
10. Natarajan, A.R.: Tr. and commentary, Sat-Darshanam (Tamil original, 33. Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta Vaibhavam, tr. Ramaswamy, Dr. S: The Guru and the
Bhagavan Ramana, Sanskrit rendering, Kavyakanta Ganapati Muni), Disciple, 1998.
Ramana Maharshi Centre for Learning (RMCL), Bangalore, 1996. 34. Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta Vaibhavam, tr. Leela, S.R.: The Glory of Vasishta
11. Golden Jubilee Souvenir, SRA, 1995. Ganapati—Biography, Sri Aurobindo Kapali Sastri Institute of Vedic
12. Iyer, T.K. Sundaresa: At the Feet of Bhagavan, SRA, 1980. Culture, Bangalore, 1999.
13. Subbaramayya, G.V.: Sri Ramana Reminiscences, SRA, 1994. 35. Sastry, Kapali: Vasishta Vaibhavam, tr. G.V. Kulkarni (unpublished).
14. Ganapati Muni: Forty Verses in Praise of Ramana, SRA, 1992. 36. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): Ramana Maharshi’s Miracles—They Happen Everyday,
15. Bhagavan Ramana: Upadesa Undiyar, tr. Sadhu Om and Michael James, Sri RMCL, 1995.
Kanvasrama Trust, Tiruvannamalai, 1986. 37. Reddy, N. Balarama: My Reminiscences, SRA, 1997.
16. Ganapati Muni: Ramana Gita—Dialogues with Ramana Maharshi, tr. and 38. Venkataramiah, Munagala (Recordist): Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi,
commentary by A.R. Natarajan, RMCL, 1990. SRA, 1984.
17. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): Forever is in the Now, RMCL, 1997. 39. Godman, David: Living by the Words of Bhagavan, Annamalai Swami
18. Brunton, Paul and Venkataramaiah, Munagala (recorded by): Conscious Ashram Trust, Tiruvannamalai, 1994.
Immortality—Conversations with Sri Ramana Maharshi, SRA, first edition 40. Sadananda, Ramana Dasa: Sri Ramana Stuti Dasakam, Ramana Dasa
1984, revised edition, 1996. Sadananda, Madras, 1933.
19. The Mountain Path (Quarterly), SRA. 41. Natarajan, A.R.: Bhagavan Ramana and Mother, RMCL, 1997.
20. Greenblatt, Joan and Greenblatt, Mathew: Bhagavan Sri Ramana—A Pictorial 42. Natarajan, A.R.: Insights, RMCL, 1996.
Biography, SRA, 1981. 43. Kunju Swami: Reminiscences, tr. Dr. K. Subrahmaniam, SRA, 1992.
21. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: Day by Day with Bhagavan, SRA, 1989. 44. Sadhu Arunachala: Sadhu’s Reminiscences, SRA.
22. Ramana Smrti, A Sri Ramana Maharshi Birth Centenary Offering, SRA, 1980. 45. Anathamurthy, T.S.: Life and Teachings of Sri Ramana Maharshi,
145\n--- 第159页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Ananthamurthy, 1972. 56. Rajan, N.N.: More Talks with Ramana Maharshi, RMCL, 1996.
46. Rao, N. Ramachandra: Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi (Kannada 57. Sastri, Jagadeeswara: Swagata Kusumanjali, SRA, 1999.
Biography). 58. Godman, David: Living by the Words of Bhagavan, Sri Annamalai Swami
47. Iyer, T.K. Sundaresa: At the Feet of Bhagavan, SRA, 1980. Ashram Trust.
48. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): Forever is in the Now, East-West (Madras) Pvt. Ltd., 59. Sastry, Kapali: The Maharshi, S.P. Pundit, Sirsi, 1954.
1997. 60. Viswanatha Swami: The Last Days and Mahanirvana of Bhagavan Sri
49. Brunton, Paul: A Search in Secret India, B.I. Publications Pvt. Ltd., New Ramana, SRA, 1991.
Delhi, 1990. 61. Osborne, Arthur: Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge, SRA,
50. Natarajan, A.R.: Ramana’s Muruganar, RMCL, 1992. 1970.
51. Muruganar: The Garland of Guru’s Sayings, tr. Prof. K. Swaminathan, SRA, 62. Nambiar, K.K.: The Guiding Presence of Sri Ramana, SRA, 1984.
1990. 63. Reddy, N. Balarama: My Recollection of Sri Bhagavan Ramana Maharshi,
52. Muruganar: Sri Ramana Gnana Bodham, Ramana Kendra, New Delhi. SRA, 1997.
53. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): Unforgettable Years, RMCL, 1997. 64. Natarajan, A.R.: Insights into the Ramana Way, RMCL, 1995.
54. Natarajan, A.R. (ed.): Living with Ramana Maharshi, RMCL, 1996. 65. Mouni Sadhu: In Days of Great Peace, George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1957.
55. Mudaliar, A. Devaraja: The Cow, Lakshmi, SRA. 66. Natarajan, A.R. (Concept): Radiance of the Self.
Glossary
Abhishekam: pouring of water over a sacred image. Jaganmaya: universal illusion.
Advaita: non-duality; a school of Vedanta philosophy teaching Japa: repetition of a sacred word, syllable, or name of God.
the oneness of God, soul, and universe, whose chief exponent Jayanti: birth anniversary (of a holy person).
was Sankaracarya. See Vedanta. Jnana: spiritual wisdom implying the direct cognition of non-
Aham Brahmasmi: “Brahma is my Self.” Sentence often repeated duality as the true nature of Reality—the knowledge of the
in the Upanishads. Self.
Annamalai: Tamil name for Arunachala. Jnani: a Self-realized sage; one who has attained realization by the
Appalam: a thin round wafer, made of black gram flour, fried path of knowledge.
crisp. Kailasa: a mountain in the Himalayas reputed to be the abode of
Atman: Self; the indwelling Divine Presence within every Siva.
individual. Kamandalams: water jars.
Bhagavan: a commonly used name for God. The term Bhagavan Karma: deeds. The destiny that a person makes for himself by the
is identified with supreme sages who are recognized as being law of cause and effect.
completely one with God. Khaddar: a coarse homespun cotton cloth.
Bhakti: devotion; love of God. Koupinam: traditional undergarment.
Bhiksa: to beg. Kumbhabhisekam: a ritualistic function consecrating a Hindu
Brahma: the Creator God; the first person of the Hindu Trinity, temple.
the other two being Visnu and Siva. Linga: a symbol. Represents Siva or the Absolute.
Brahman: the Supreme Being; the Absolute; the essence of life. Maha: great.
Chela: disciple. Maharshi: great seer, great rishi.
Choultry: an asram, monastery, or community center. Mahasamadhi: lit. “the great absorption.” A term used to describe
Dakshinamurti: “the South-facing form”; one of the names of Siva. the physical death of a great sage.
Darsan: lit. “sight.” The blessing derived from beholding a saint or Maheswara: “Great Lord”; Siva.
a sacred site. Mandapam: pavillion.
Dattatreya: famous yogi, thought to be an incarnation of Vishnu; Mandiram: an abode, or temple.
attributed as author of Avhadhuta Upanishad. Mantra: a sacred formula or utterance; a prayer.
Devasthanam: the statutory authority which manages the affairs of Maulvi: Islamic cleric or imam.
the temple. Maya: cosmic illusion; the power (sakti) inherent in Brahman by
Dhyana: contemplation, meditation. which it manifests the world.
Ganesha: the son of Siva and Parvati, god of wisdom and remover Meru: in Puranic legend, the mythical golden mountain; the axis
of all obstacles. of the world.
Gauri: the “white” goddess; name of Parvati. Moksa: liberation from samsara.
Giripradakshina: giri means hill, pradakshina, going around Mouna: silence.
a holy object or place, keeping the object at one’s right. Muni: a holy man given to solitude and contemplation.
Circumambulation of Arunachala. Mutt: a meeting place and abode of sadhus.
Gunas: the three cosmic qualities of sattva (purity), rajas Nadis: channels of flow of subtle vital force (prana).
(passion), and tamas (obscurity) of which all of manifestation Nataraja: “Lord of the Dance”; one of the names of Siva.
is constituted. Nirguna: without form or qualities or attributes; opposite to
Hrdaya: the Heart. The seat of Consciousness at the right side saguna.
of the chest, as experienced and expounded by Bhagavan Sri Nirvana: the extinguishing of earthly attachments and desires;
Ramana. freedom from rebirth. Liberation.
Iswara: lit. “the Lord of the Universe”; the personal God who Om: the sacred syllable, the supreme mantra, representing the
manifests in the triple form of Brahma (the Creator), Visnu substratum of creative sound which sustains the universe.
(the Sustainer), and Siva (the Transformer). Parayana: recitation.
146\n--- 第160页 ---\nBiographical Notes
Payasam: sweet rice pudding. Siva: the Destroyer God; the third person of the Hindu Trinity, the
Parsee: member of the Zoroastrian community in India. other two being Brahma and Visnu.
Prarabdha: the part of one’s karma (destiny) to be worked out in Siva Panchaksari: mantra chanting the name of Siva.
this life. Siva swarupa: lit. “embodiment” or “true form” of Siva. Refers to
Prasad: food offered to a deity or to a spiritual teacher; this same mountain of Arunachala.
food distributed to devotees as a blessing. Sivaratri: “the Night of Siva”; traditional Hindu festival.
Puja: ritualistic worship. Sphurana: radiation, emanation, or pulsation.
Puranas: eighteen sacred books ascribed to Vyasa, which preserve Sri: lit. “blessed” or “beatific.” Used in modern times as a
traditions of myth, legend, and rite. respectful prefix to a name.
Purushottama: lit. “highest spirit, highest soul”; a term used to Swarupa: lit. “essence, nature.”
refer to the highest Self. Swami: lit. “Lord.” Used as a sign of respect for a spiritual teacher.
Raja yoga: the principal system of yoga as taught by Patanjali. Swaraj: self-rule, self-reliance.
Rama japa: mantra repeating the name of Rama. Tapas: religious austerities.
Rishi: ancient seer. Upadesa: the spiritual guidance or teachings given by a guru.
Sadhak: a spiritual aspirant. Upanishads: portion of Vedas (Vedanta) dealing with the ultimate
Sadhana: spiritual practice. truth and its realization.
Sadguru: the great master, the true or perfect guru. Vahana: in Hindu mythology, the object or creature that serves as
Saguna: with form, with qualities; opposite of nirguna. the vehicle and as the sign of a particular deity.
Sahaja samadhi: constant and natural absorption in the Self. Vaishnava: a worshipper of Vishnu.
Saivite: worshipper of Lord Siva. Vasanas: latencies or tendencies inherent in man.
Sakti: power or energy; the active feminine aspect of God. Vedanta: the Absolute Truth as established by the Upanishads,
Samadhi: the state in which the meditator and object of Brahma Sutras, and Bhagavad Gita. The end or consummation
meditation, thinker and thought, become one in perfect of the Vedas.
absorption of the mind. Vedas: The sacred books of the Hindus: Rig, Yajur, Sama, and
Samsara: the realm of relativity, transience, and illusion. Atharva, revealed through the rishis.
Samskaras: innate tendencies, impressions. Vichara: enquiry into the truth of the Self.
Sankalpa: resolution, intentional desire. Vishnu: the Preserver God; the second person of the Hindu
Sannyasi: one who has taken formal vows of rennunciation. Trinity, the other two being Brahma and Siva.
Sastras: scriptures. Yama: the god of death.
Sastri: one learned in the Sastras. Yoga: systems of spiritual techniques and discipline through which
Sat: Existence; pure Being. the practitioner attains union with God as specifically
Sattva: purity; one of the three gunas. outlined in the Yoga Sutras of Patanajali as well as other yogic
Shraddha: faith. and tantric texts.
Siddha: one endowed with supernatural powers and capable of Yogi: one who follows or has mastered the path of yoga (path of
performing miracles. Union)
Siddhi: supernatural powers; attainment. Yogini: woman with yogic attainments.
For a glossary of all key foreign words used in books published by World Wisdom, including metaphysical terms
in English, consult: www.DictionaryofSpiritualTerms.com. This on-line Dictionary of Spiritual Terms provides
extensive definitions, examples and related terms in other languages.
Biographical Notes
A.R. Natarajan is the President of the Ramana Maharshi Centre for Learning and the Bhagavan Sri Ramana
Maharshi Research Centre, Bangalore. He is also the Vice-President of the Ramana Kendra, Delhi. From June 1982
to January 1986 he was the editor of the quarterly published by Sri Ramanasramam, The Mountain Path. His works
include commentaries on Sat-Darshanam; Selections from Ramana Gita; Upadesa Saram, covering the core of the
Maharshi’s teachings, and Bhagavan Ramana and Mother.
Eliot Deutsch is Professor of Philosophy and Chair of the Department of Philosophy, University of Hawaii. He is
an eminent philosopher, teacher, and writer who has made important contributions to the understanding and appre-
ciation of Eastern philosophies in the West through his many works on comparative philosophy and comparative aes-
thetics. He was editor (1967-1987) of the international journal Philosophy East and West, Director of the Sixth Eastern
Philosophers conference, and past president of the Society for Asian and Comparative Philosophy. He is the author of
15 books, including, On Truth: An Ontological Theory (1979), Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction (1969),
Studies in Comparative Aesthetics (1975), Religion and Spirituality (1995), Essays on the Nature of Art (1996), and The
Essential Vedanta (2004).
147\n--- 第161页 ---\nTimeless in Time
Other Titles on Hinduism by World Wisdom
A Guide to Hindu Spirituality,
by Arvind Sharma, 2006
The Essential Sri Anandamayi Ma,
by Alexander Lipsky and Sri Anandamayi Ma, 2007
The Essential Swami Ramdas: Commemorative Edition,
compiled by Susunaga Weeraperuma, 2005
The Essential Vedanta: A New Source Book of Advaita Vedanta,
edited by Eliot Deutsch and Rohit Dalvi, 2004
Hinduism and Buddhism,
by Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, 2007
Introduction to Hindu Dharma: The 68th Jagadguru of Kanchipuram,
edited by Michael Oren Fitzgerald, 2007
Lamp of Non-Dual Knowledge & Cream of Liberation: Two Jewels of Indian Wisdom,
translated by Swami Sri Ramanananda Saraswathi, 2003
Paths to Transcendence: According to Shankara, Ibn Arabi, and Meister Eckhart,
by Reza Shah-Kazemi, 2006
Tripura Rahasya: The Secret of the Supreme Goddess,
translated by Swami Sri Ramanananda Saraswathi, 2002
Unveiling the Garden of Love: Mystical Symbolism in Layla Majnun & Gitagovinda,
by Lalita Sinha, 2007
Timeless in Time: Sri Ramana Maharshi,
by A.R. Natarajan, 2006

148\n--- 第162页 ---\nTimeless Time
in
Sri Ramana
Maharshi
Foreword by
Eliot Deutsch
A.R. Natarajan
Timeless
in
Time
A.R.Natarajan
World
Wisdom
Hinduism/Spirituality
Sri
Ramana
Maharshi
This Illustrated edItIon features:
• autobiographical statements of Sri Ramana Maharshi;
• the essential teachings of the Maharshi, in his own words;
• biographical text from A.R. Natarajan, gathered from direct sources;
• a foreword by Eliot Deutsch, a leading authority on Hindu thought;
• 160 photographs, some published for the first time;
• a glossary of Hindu terms;
• detailed notes, references, and a bibliography.
srI ramana maharshI (1879-1950) was probably the most famous Hindu sage
of the twentieth century. He was renowned for the simple approach he took in
leading people to spiritual realization, and for the powerful peace-giving pres-
ence that people from all religions experienced upon meeting him. Timeless in
Time is the story of his own remarkable spiritual life, along with the essence of
his teachings. The many photos of the sage, and of the people and places impor-
tant in his life, enhance our understanding of the words of the text with a sense of
the Maharshi’s unique presence.
“The heritage of India is enriched with numberless saints and yogis. Ramana Maharshi represents that tradition
and his spiritual greatness is guiding millions of people. Such masters light the path and bring solace to suffer-
ing humanity.”
—His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama
“He bore himself with naturalness and at the same time with dignity. His mien was cheerful, smiling, polite.
His eyes with a gentle benignity rested on my face. His body was absolutely still. He smiled and said, ‘Silence
is also conversation.’”
—W. Somerset Maugham, playwright and novelist, on meeting Sri Ramana Maharshi (Maugham
would later use the Maharshi as the model for the holy man in the novel The Razor’s Edge)
“The Maharshi,… looking intently for a few minutes into Ramdas’ eyes as though he was pouring into Ramdas
his blessings through those orbs, nodded his head to say he had blessed. A thrill of inexpressible joy coursed
through Ramdas’ frame.”
—Swami Ramdas, renowned Hindu sage, on experiencing the presence of Sri Ramana Maharshi
“Sri Ramana Maharshi … taught no formal doctrine, but with the piercing question ‘Who am I’ drove his
disciples to the Self.”
—Heinrich Zimmer, from his book Philosophies of India
“He proved in his person that a consciousness transcending both the physical and mental plane was compatible
with full use of the physical and mental faculties.… He belonged to the true line of India’s spiritual teachers.”
—The Times Literary Supplement
ISBN-13: 978-1-933316-15-4
World Wisdom ISBN-10: 1-933316-15-2
$21.95 US / $27.95 CAN